---
zotero:
  scannable-cite: false # only relevant when your compiling to scannable-cite .odt
  client: zotero # defaults to zotero
  author-in-text: false # when true, enabled fake author-name-only cites by replacing it with the text of the last names of the authors
  csl-style: harvard # pre-fill the style
layout: post
categories: other
title: Annual Review - Year 3 (part-time PhD) - Mick Chesterman
---

The primary aims of this review document is give to a short update on research activity and to frame emerging results from the study in line with existing material in this field.

## Review of Context of Research

The potential of digital game making is explored in depth in a review by Kafai and Burke [-@kafai_constructionist_2015]. The most prominent learning objective of making games in educational setting is to develop _coding and computing skills_. While there has been a large body of research on the value and practice of game making for educational purposes, it is a dynamic landscape which has many areas which merit additional research. New software tools which make games offering new pedagogical possibilities emerge regularly. Game playing practices and the opportunities provided by participation in wider communities also continue to evolve. For example, casual and retro games played by both adults and children are increasingly available via smart phones and home consoles. The nostalgia around such games and the associated aesthetics of cuteness creates a potential for connection between younger and older players [@boyle_retro-futurism_2017]. The sustained popularity of retro games together with easy-to-use game making tools and code frameworks provides an entry point for game players into game making cultures which is reflected in the success of amateur games publishing websites like itch.io [@garda_nostalgia_2014]. My study, in part, asks how the motivational and navigational affordances of enthusiast game making communities can be brought into more structured educational environments.   

In the context of UK computing education, the report "Next Gen: Transforming the UK into the world’s leading talent hub for the video games and visual effects industries" [@livingstone_next_2011] contained the recommendations to include computer science in core curriculum, introduce a new Computing GCSE exam (a general exam for 16 year olds before they progress to more specialised study), offer bursaries for computing teachers and to implement well-supported use of games and visual animation in the school curriculum as a way to attract more young people to the subject. The After the Reboot report [@waite_pedagogy_2017] returned to the subject of game making as a way of increasing engagement in the process of coding. The review highlighted several areas of promise which needed more research: using games for engagement, use of design patterns (a term explored later in this chapter) and the involvement of girls in coding and social and cultural aspects of coding.

## Summary of Activity since RD2

My RD2 was in December 2019. I was suspended from studies in Summer 2020 and restarted earlier this summer in June 2022. This section is a brief summary of some of the activities that I have managed to undertake in this timeframe.

### Creation of materials for Make Code and Glitch.com

The process of running more courses in the  
Based on cards for DPs, and additional challenges, and fictional design.


## Early Dissemination of Results via Presentations

While lock down presented some challenges. There were opportunities to disseminate early results.

- Online Mozilla Conference 2021: Mozilla were pioneers of in informal digital learning and associated tools [@sefton-green_mapping_2013]. I presented an overview of the key salient features of the 3M model during an online conference to replace the in-person event. The interactive presentation was well received.

-  Online Presentation at Manchester Games Network: In this 90 minute presenation and interactive session I was supported by Sam and Paul to share early results. This was a challenging but helpful exercise. I was struck by the grounded nature of this research.

- Informal Participation on Playful Learning conference 2022: The use of games consoles loaded with games created by participants is an engaging way to talk about my research.

This early dissemination of results prompted an deeper analysis of my existing data in terms of the overarching themes. I wanted to present the themes in an accessible way which suited the dissemination of findings to audiences of academics and educators in both formal and informal domains. The a pedagogical model which I called the 3M Game Making Model emerged from this process.



### Writing Book Chapters

I have written three book chapters recently (pre-publisher versions available at  )

The process of writing for and audience of teachers was productive in shaking up my thinking on Computational Thinking and conceptions of abstract concepts and more grounded concrete practices in the fields of computing education, project and inclusive contexts.

### Results in the 3M Framework as a book chapter.

The 3M model was the basis for a book chapter with a mixed audience of academics and

## Data Gathering - Additional Material and Summary

In early 2020 I rad two additional courses on game making. The first involved a similar level of video data capture and participants to earlier courses with 360, the second was more restricted due to the rooms that were available. Limited screen capture data was recorded.

## Data Analysis

The process of data analysis is underway. Before starting a detailed analysis of the data I was unsure if sufficient relevant data had gathered or if more needed to be undertaken.

In the RD2 a vignette was selected as an exemplar of material gathered. The data from 360 camera allowed clarification and gesture analysis to be added to a transcription and description of what was happening on the laptop screens of the pair of participants in questions.

This study presented significant challenges in regards to analysis of data, some forseen and some unexpected.

- The challenge of the length of time required to analyse data.  
- The process of collating and contrasting data from significantly after the date is challenging.

Shortly after starting a deeper analysis of data an coding material it became apparent that the initial sessions of data gathering in the first half of 2019 were by far the richest in interaction and community activity.

Thus while additional data gathering was useful in terms of notes gathered and development of material, it will not be analyised in the depth of hte first iteration and may be the basis of future analysis in follow up papers.

## Iterative Project Design Revision

The foundation of this research is a design-based research approach which is underlined by Activity Theory as a conceptual framework. While the analysis of results at RD2 stage was going to be based on Engeström's detailed framework of third generation Activity Theory, my attempts to write up emerging results within this framework did not gel. Possible reasons for this seeming mismatch include the disconnection of my learning environment from the workplace siting often assumed in that model when paired with the suggested methodology of formative interventions. The process of trying to map the different levels of activity happening in the formation and evolution of a community and the temptation to write something about each of the axes was overwhelming.

Especially so when trying to write for a wider audience as in the teacher training

The underlying ideas of activity as a base for analysis gives a much wider scope for interpretation. I was drawn to  Rogoff's three planes / foci  as an analytical tool.


Alternating between concrete and abstract - CT as a source of debate for this area - deepening my understanding and practitioner focus.

Emerging Focus on Design Patterns
## Next Goal write up one chapter of results

### Coding existing data

#### Data processing

#### Nvivo coding

when coding I started with some preset codes from the literature for examples Barron's codes on parent roles when helping digital projects. However, as coding progressed, I modified and extended these codes to better match the data I was working with.

### Explore how to present Missions part of 3M framework as chapter.

This involves developing a stream of activity which is treated in whole. While some writing about foundational aims and background context is included as a summary of the structure of the introduction and literature review of the intended thesis.

#### Revision of Research questions

Part of this early writing up process is to revise research questions. To so this I've used a Kanban software allowing rapid revision and repositioning of questions and concepts. [What is a KanBan approach. ]

The link of project-based learning to my own teaching at university and the focus on inclusive practices of recent writings steered me to include these broad terms into a revision of research questions. However, as coding began, the need to bring more focus to the questions became apparent.


## Appendices

- Summary of the data gathering as table.
- Evolution of research questions - as screen shot from Trello
- Current coding structure.
- Abstract and link to full book chapter - and draft chapters
