Investigating the Potential of Family Game Making to develop Collaborative Skills

Background

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology and the subsequent lag in associated teaching strategies is addressed in a recent report on UK computer education []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"c2kbMLuk","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","plainCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4655,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"itemData":{"id":4655,"type":"report","title":"After the Reboot: Computing Education in UK Schools","publisher":"The Royal Society","source":"ResearchGate","URL":"https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/computing-education/","shortTitle":"After the Reboot","author":[{"literal":"The Royal Society"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2017"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2018",7,2]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDWlkp23Smbm}(The Royal Society, 2017). The report highlights the potential of digital game making to enhance computing provision and need for more research into this area. It also foregrounds Wing's []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dET7a6dL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(2006)","plainCitation":"(2006)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":293,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"itemData":{"id":293,"type":"article-journal","title":"Computational thinking","container-title":"Communications of the ACM","page":"33","volume":"49","issue":"3","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1145/1118178.1118215","ISSN":"00010782","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Wing","given":"Jeannette M."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2006",3,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDsfL5qgdvQP}(2006) conception of computational thinking, which prioritises abstract thought processes and pre-planning, as a key component of a computing curriculum.

Game making is also happening in informal settings including museums, libraries via initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo. Here, family members create games together using accessible technology. While these environments have great potential to inform practice in collaborative digital making and teaching of computing concepts, sparse research exists.

This lack of research concerning collaborative, learner lead approaches is disappointing as pioneers of digital game making Papert and Turkle []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"7aJb2EU4","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1990)","plainCitation":"(1990)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":3905,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"itemData":{"id":3905,"type":"article-journal","title":"Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete","container-title":"Signs","volume":"16","issue":"1","URL":"http://www.papert.org/articles/EpistemologicalPluralism.html","author":[{"family":"Papert","given":"Seymour"},{"family":"Turkle","given":"Sherry"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1990"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2017",11,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDZ1KomrVAO4}(1990) explored their value of in early studies. Subsequent studies have prioritised individual computing progress using particular software tools rather than community activities to support learner autonomy and collaboration in digital making. This study will design a pedagogical framework as part of a participatory game making club for families which addresses these deficits.

Methodology

Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study. Based on constructivism's epistemological belief that knowledge is social and collaboratively constructed, this study will focus on the importance of learner experience. Thus I adopt an applied constructivist approach of student centred learning which highlights feedback, collaboration and learner autonomy []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"DklhkuUm","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)","plainCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4359,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"itemData":{"id":4359,"type":"article-journal","title":"Rich environments for active learning: a definition","container-title":"ALT-J","page":"5-34","volume":"3","issue":"2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/0968776950030202","ISSN":"0968-7769, 1741-1629","shortTitle":"Rich environments for active learning","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Grabinger","given":"R. Scott"},{"family":"Dunlap","given":"Joanna C."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1995",1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDGVKI5gmfDp}(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995).

\ **Research Questions**

1.  What methods currently exist to facilitate collaborative learning in     digital game making environments and how effective do participants     and facilitators perceive them to be? 2.  What potential for collaborative pedagogical approaches to digital     game making does family involvement environment is taken into     account? 3.  What effect does a pedagogical model focused on collaborative design     have on parent and child learner experience of digital game making ? 4.  What is an effective way to capture and analyse data to study     collaborative learning in a complex game making environment?

**Research Context & Methods **

Research will happen in three phases (timeline in separate document). Phase activities are outlined in the table below. Data gathering will be undertaken at twice yearly game making courses which I facilitate for MMU's EdLab project. Courses comprise 6 workshops and with 12-15 participants comprising Home Educator parents and children aged 8-12.

**P1: **An initial pedagogical framework will be based on my existing practice of multimodal, collaborative game making. Interviews with four regional game making facilitators will be conducted to expand and revise this framework. The resulting design will be tested with a pilot group. Two subsequent participatory workshops will record participant feedback and suggested alterations to the design of the intervention.

While my own practice already involves an emergent model of practice informed by participant input, as these workshops will be explicitly for the purpose of revising the framework based on user perspective and allow exploration of difference in experience of adult learners and young people.

**P2:** I will conduct three workshops to test emergent data gathering methods targeted at recording learner experience and participant interactions. Methods will include screen capture of collaborative coding, 360º video of work areas and use of participant audio diaries. The goal is to support naturalistic data analysis without interrupting learning experience or generating unwieldy datasets. The drop in the cost of 360º video recording devices provides an opportunity to create new research methodologies. It is expected that rich digital recordings generated by processes and diverse artefacts created by participants as part of the game making process will greatly enhance data on the user perspective in keeping with the constructivist perspective of the study. This is imagined to be a potentially significant area of this study and is addressed in RQ4.

**P3: **The bulk of data gathering will consist of via two iterations of the evolving pedagogical framework using data collection methods emerging from P2. I will take the role of participant observer and focus on user perspective of the learning environment via journal entries, analysis of in-situ video and audio recordings and subsequent in-depth group interviews with six families to explore areas of emerging interest.

The following table summarises the contents of each phase (a timeline is included as a separate document).

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ |                       |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ |                       | Interviews with game  |                       | |                       | making facilitators   |                       | |                       | (4 x 60m)             |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Pilot game-making     |                       |                       | | workshops (6 x 120m)  |                       |                       | | with home education   |                       |                       | | families              |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Collaborative design  |                       |                       | | and evaluation        |                       |                       | | workshops (2 x 90m)   |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | P2                    | Revision of           |                       | |                       | pedagogical design    |                       | |                       | based on P1 results   |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Workshops to test     |                       |                       | | data collection       |                       |                       | | methods for P3 (2 x   |                       |                       | | 120m)                 |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | P3                    | Facilitation and      |                       | |                       | observation of two    |                       | |                       | iterations of game    |                       | |                       | making workshops (12  |                       | |                       | x 120m)\              |                       | |                       | \                     |                       | |                       | Collaborative design  |                       | |                       | and evaluation        |                       | |                       | workshops (2 x 120m)\ |                       | |                       | \                     |                       | |                       | Mid-point and         |                       | |                       | project-end research  |                       | |                       | interviews as family  |                       | |                       | units (12 x 45m)      |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Data Analysis

In P1 a literature review will inform research design and creation of a thematic coding scheme (after Braun and Clarke) to analyse pilot workshop observations and interviews with regional educators.

More on analysis of artefacts in workshops -- possibly from section above?\ Perhaps beginning to turn to activity theory to analyse, mediational objects.

P2 and P3 are characterised by an on-going analysis of data further refining each iteration of the resultant pedagogical design. While data collection is expected to be extensive, key journal entries will illuminate focal areas. Interview data and digital artefacts of these key moments will be analysed with a particular focus on group dynamics via interaction process analysis (Bales, 2001).

(But we need more global view of tensions and breakthroughs in collaborative process over time.)

The participatory approach of this study, informed by the philosophical underpinning of constructivism suits an analytical framework capable of interpretation of a rich and reciprocal learning environment over time.

Thus activity theory will be used as a suitable lens to analyse the complexity of the game making process including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies (Engeström, 1999).

Beyond this more conventional use of AT to analyse the targeted system of activity emerges in P3, an AT approach may also be of use in the emergent stages of the project to begin to communicate the complexities and tensions of the process and use of mediational objects to participants to aid the collaborative development process. This will be done though in a visual and accessible way using artefacts and interactions created in pilot workshops. Thus an emerging vocabulary of AT terms emerges as a lingua franca to aid self observation and reporting of participants.

\ \ **References** 