RD2 ===

Aims of Study  --------------

*The focus of this study is on collaborative production in family learning environments. I plan to approach it from constructivist, sociocultural perspectives. *

Based on need of RSC games in computing , and evidence that choice increases motivation and playfulness, and need to incorporate home learning into educational projects.

Aims are how to leverage power of game making, designing for choice and learning communities to develop collaboration & meta cognition skills.

Research Questions

-   What methods currently exist to facilitate collaborative learning in     digital game making environments -   What factors should be considered when designing for participant     choice in digital game making environments? -   What effect does family involvement have on the potential for     collaborative pedagogical approaches to digital game making? -   What effect does a pedagogical model focused on collaborative design     learner choice have on parent and child learner experience of     digital game making ? -   What is the relationship between learner choice and collaborative     potential in creative production processes?

Literature Review -----------------

Game Making Overview / Introduction

Reviews of learning dimensions []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"GKBdQlg3","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Earp, 2015; Kafai and Burke, 2015)","plainCitation":"(Earp, 2015; Kafai and Burke, 2015)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4907,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/GF2XMQBJ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/GF2XMQBJ"],"itemData":{"id":4907,"type":"paper-conference","title":"Game Making for Learning: A Systematic Review of the Research Literature","source":"ResearchGate","abstract":"Game making as a strategy for supporting learning processes is a research topic that has roots stretching back to the constructionist movement of the 1980s and 1990s. However, the current popularity of digital gaming, Game Based Learning (GBL), 21st century skills development and learner-centred strategies is sharping interest in the affordances that digital game making offers and how these can be harnessed in education to enhance learning. This contribution charts the emergence and establishment of learner-driven digital game making through a systematic review of the global literature on the topic published since the early 1980s. It maps out the research concerns under investigation in the field, as gleaned from a dataset of almost 500 publications of different types specifically dedicated to the topic. The review forms part of the author's research activities in game making for learning carried out with an EC co-funded project called MAGICAL (Making Games in Collaboration for Learning). The review begins with a description of the method and procedure adopted for carrying out the literature search and producing a comprehensive dataset of records. This is followed by reporting and analysis of the generated data. The review concludes with a brief discussion and reflection on the results.","shortTitle":"Game Making for Learning","author":[{"family":"Earp","given":"Jeffrey"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2015",11,17]]}},"label":"page"},{"id":3644,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/Q7JCMQ3N"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/Q7JCMQ3N"],"itemData":{"id":3644,"type":"article-journal","title":"Constructionist Gaming: Understanding the Benefits of Making Games for Learning","container-title":"Educational Psychologist","page":"313-334","volume":"50","issue":"4","source":"PubMed Central","abstract":"There has been considerable interest in examining the educational potential of playing video games. One crucial element, however, has traditionally been left out of these discussions—namely, children's learning through making their own games. In this article, we review and synthesize 55 studies from the last decade on making games and learning. We found that the majority of studies focused on teaching coding and academic content through game making, and that few studies explicitly examined the roles of collaboration and identity in the game making process. We argue that future discussions of serious gaming ought to be more inclusive of constructionist approaches to realize the full potential of serious gaming. Making games, we contend, not only more genuinely introduces children to a range of technical skills but also better connects them to each other, addressing the persistent issues of access and diversity present in traditional digital gaming cultures.","DOI":"10.1080/00461520.2015.1124022","ISSN":"0046-1520","note":"PMID: 27019536\nPMCID: PMC4784508","shortTitle":"Constructionist Gaming","journalAbbreviation":"Educ Psychol","author":[{"family":"Kafai","given":"Yasmin B."},{"family":"Burke","given":"Quinn"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2015"]]}},"label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDJSe8eAxdnd}(Earp, 2015; Kafai and Burke, 2015), find some dimensions are relatively well established, computing knowledge & subject knowledge.

-   Examples game making to support computing Logo / Papert, Scratch     Resnick, -   Game making to build subject knowledge; maths, natural science

However social / C21 skills including communication and collaboration are less researched, chiefly mentioned as a by-product rather than primary topic of research. An outcome of less priority for such skills in school cultures of individualised assessment []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"yLHfgbgZ","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Rogoff, 2003)","plainCitation":"(Rogoff, 2003)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":6985,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/MPJ5DJQJ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/MPJ5DJQJ"],"itemData":{"id":6985,"type":"book","title":"The cultural nature of human development","publisher":"Oxford University Press","publisher-place":"Oxford [UK] ;a New York","number-of-pages":"434","source":"Library of Congress ISBN","event-place":"Oxford [UK] ;a New York","ISBN":"978-0-19-513133-8","call-number":"HM686 .R64 2003","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Rogoff","given":"Barbara"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2003"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RND5ntft7PwXH}(Rogoff, 2003).

In article movement from tools to communities []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"C5ZJtwqM","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Kafai and Burke, 2014)","plainCitation":"(Kafai and Burke, 2014)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4989,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/9JIVJQJV"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/9JIVJQJV"],"itemData":{"id":4989,"type":"chapter","title":"A decade of programming games for learning: From tools to communities","container-title":"Handbook of Digital Games","publisher":"Wiley","publisher-place":"NY","source":"ResearchGate","event-place":"NY","shortTitle":"A decade of programming games for learning","author":[{"family":"Kafai","given":"Yasmin"},{"family":"Burke","given":"Quinn"}],"editor":[{"family":"Aguis","given":"H"},{"family":"Angelides","given":"M.C."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2014",1,1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDkJz6VKmtoo}(Kafai and Burke, 2014). the authors acknowledge the influence and of the socio-cultural schools on conceptions of learning

Social, Collaboration and Choice

Social aspects vs Personal aspects of learning even conceptions of group work

Collaboration spectrum -- participation to project work to Joint Problem Spaces in problem solving collaboration and negotiation as a key part of collaboration, open problems []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"OiUA6F31","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Jordan, 2004; Roschelle and Teasley, 1995)","plainCitation":"(Jordan, 2004; Roschelle and Teasley, 1995)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":7068,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/M39J295K"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/M39J295K"],"itemData":{"id":7068,"type":"chapter","title":"Scaffolding learning and co-constructing understandings","container-title":"Early childhood education: Society and culture","page":"31–42","author":[{"family":"Jordan","given":"Barbara"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2004"]]}},"label":"page"},{"id":6536,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7PPJ9ZS4"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7PPJ9ZS4"],"itemData":{"id":6536,"type":"chapter","title":"The Construction of Shared Knowledge in Collaborative Problem Solving","container-title":"Computer Supported Collaborative Learning","publisher":"Springer Berlin Heidelberg","publisher-place":"Berlin, Heidelberg","page":"69-97","source":"Crossref","event-place":"Berlin, Heidelberg","abstract":"This paper focuses on the processes involved in collaboration using a microanalysis of one dyad's work with a computer-based environment (the Envisioning Machine). The interaction between participants is analysed with respect to a 'Joint Problem Space', which comprises an emergent, socially-negotiated set of knowledge elements, such as goals, problem state descriptions and problem solving actions. Our analysis shows how this shared conceptual space is constructed through the external mediational framework of shared language, situation and activity. This approach has particular implications for understanding how the benefits of collaboration are realised and serves to clarify the possible roles of the computers in supporting collaborative learning.","URL":"http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/978-3-642-85098-1_5","ISBN":"978-3-642-85100-1","note":"DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-85098-1_5","language":"en","editor":[{"family":"O’Malley","given":"Claire"}],"author":[{"family":"Roschelle","given":"Jeremy"},{"family":"Teasley","given":"Stephanie D."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1995"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2018",11,2]]}},"label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDXGf0hq459P}(Jordan, 2004; Roschelle and Teasley, 1995)

Helping strategies in digital environments, Barron and Roque []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"cWm86ebr","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Barron et al., 2009; Roque et al., 2016)","plainCitation":"(Barron et al., 2009; Roque et al., 2016)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":6497,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7GMWQYV6"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7GMWQYV6"],"itemData":{"id":6497,"type":"article-journal","title":"Parents as Learning Partners in the Development of Technological Fluency","container-title":"International Journal of Learning and Media","page":"55-77","volume":"1","issue":"2","source":"Crossref","abstract":"This paper presents research on parent support of the development of new media skills and technological fluency. Parents’ roles in their children’s learning were identified based on interviews with eight middle school students and their parents. All eight students were highly experienced with technology activities. Seven distinct parental roles that supported learning were identified and defined: Teacher, Collaborator, Learning Broker, Resource Provider, Nontechnical Consultant, Employer, and Learner. The parents in this sample varied in their level of technological knowledge, though in every family at least one parent worked in the computer industry as an engineer or designer. The paper presents the approach used to identify these roles, the coding system used, and examples of each role across the cases. The diversity and density of roles played by parents for individual students are also quantified. Findings indicate that for these eight learners parents play significant roles in supporting creative technologically mediated activities. The findings highlight the importance of understanding family-based learning relationships when considering pathways to early expertise with new media.","DOI":"10.1162/ijlm.2009.0021","ISSN":"19436068","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Barron","given":"Brigid"},{"family":"Martin","given":"Caitlin Kennedy"},{"family":"Takeuchi","given":"Lori"},{"family":"Fithian","given":"Rachel"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2009",5]]}},"label":"page"},{"id":6477,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/FURUF33F"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/FURUF33F"],"itemData":{"id":6477,"type":"paper-conference","title":"“I’m Not Just a Mom”: Parents Developing Multiple Roles in Creative Computing","container-title":"Conference: International Conference of the Learning Sciences","source":"repository.isls.org","abstract":"Creating, designing, and building with computing have gained recognition as important activities for children, but few actually engage in these creative opportunities. Social support from parents can be essential to engaging children, but for parents with limited backgrounds in computing, they are often unsure what roles they can play. For parents to develop supportive roles, they must gain first-hand experience in creative computing for themselves and with their children. In this paper, we examine the experiences of parents participating in a community-based program called Family Creative Learning, where families design and invent together using creative technologies like Scratch. We describe three case studies of how parents developed multiple roles such as collaborator, teacher, and learner as they created and collaborated with their children on technology-based projects. We discuss design opportunities to provide meaningful experiences for parents and children to build projects and build supportive roles around computing.","URL":"https://repository.isls.org//handle/1/177","shortTitle":"“I’m Not Just a Mom”","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Roque","given":"Ricarose"},{"family":"Lin","given":"Karina"},{"family":"Liuzzi","given":"Richard"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2016",7]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2018",10,30]]}},"label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDZCMcFAOLmb}(Barron et al., 2009; Roque et al., 2016). Using these as a basis for analysis of data.

Designing educational settings for choice

Rogoff []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"XhP9UBiL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1994)","plainCitation":"(1994)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":7216,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7PJ8XND5"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7PJ8XND5"],"itemData":{"id":7216,"type":"article-journal","title":"Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners","container-title":"Mind, Culture, and Activity","page":"209-229","volume":"1","issue":"4","source":"Taylor and Francis+NEJM","abstract":"The idea of a community of learners is based on the premise that learning occurs as people participate in shared endeavors with others, with all playing active but often asymmetrical roles in sociocultural activity. This contrasts with models of learning that are based on one‐sided notions of learning— either that it occurs through transmission of knowledge from experts or acquisition of knowledge by novices, with the learner or the others (respectively) in a passive role. In this paper, I develop the distinction between the community of learners and one‐sided approaches from the perspective of a theory of learning as participation, and use two lines of research to illustrate the transitions in perspective necessary to understand the idea of communities of learners. One line of research examines differing models of teaching and learning employed by caregivers and toddlers from Guatemalan Mayan and middle‐class European‐American families; the other line of research involves a study of how middle‐class parents make a transition from their own schooling background to participate in instruction in a public US elementary school.","DOI":"10.1080/10749039409524673","ISSN":"1074-9039","author":[{"family":"Rogoff","given":"Barbara"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1994",9,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDKrrZkiZXzz}(1994) in her development of the concept of communities of learners, advocates superceding idea of a spectrum of adult-controlled, instruction based environments and an oppositional conception of child-controlled, exploration based environments.

Rogoff outlines personal, social and community learning planes []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"fDkOPFMU","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1993)","plainCitation":"(1993)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":3660,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/ZMN79J65"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/ZMN79J65"],"itemData":{"id":3660,"type":"article-journal","title":"Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appropriation, guided participation, and apprenticeship","container-title":"Pedagogy and practice: Culture and identities","page":"58–74","source":"Google Scholar","shortTitle":"Observing sociocultural activity on three planes","author":[{"family":"Rogoff","given":"Barbara"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1993"]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDa7PoB9cWxq}(1993). and associated terms of guided participation.

Digital Making, Family and Professional Contexts

For this study the wider community can be considered to be the contexts of digital family learning in the home, retro game playing and wider game making communities of indy games.

Such an area suits an ecological approach to research and our understandings of the learning happening from Rogoff

Some relevant contextual factors that may

-   parental anxiety surrounding digital activity -   The incorporation of the video game console back into family life in     response to fragmentation     []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"lMy8Jv9n","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Chambers, 2012)","plainCitation":"(Chambers, 2012)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":6732,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/D526UVGH"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/D526UVGH"],"itemData":{"id":6732,"type":"article-journal","title":"‘Wii play as a family’: the rise in family-centred video gaming","container-title":"Leisure Studies","page":"69-82","volume":"31","issue":"1","source":"Taylor and Francis+NEJM","abstract":"The idea that video gaming is for the ‘whole family’, to be played in the communal space of the living room, has gained momentum since the release of Microsoft Xbox, Sony Playstation and Nintendo Wii. This article addresses the growing popularity in family-centred video gaming in the British context by examining the design, promotion, instatement and use of this new media technology in the home. Research on the domestication of media technology is drawn on to examine the social impulses and conditions under which family-centred video gaming is introduced in the home as a domestic leisure activity. In response to parental anxieties about children’s disengagement from family life through new media use, industry-led claims that video gaming can foster family harmony are appealing. Representations of family gaming in the Wii commercials are analysed in relation to the findings of recent independent surveys on emerging patterns of gaming between parents and children. Policy issues emerge about the potential social and educational benefits of family-centred gaming and assumptions about them made in surveys and government-commissioned reports. Important questions are raised about the family dynamics of video gaming and children’s potential to benefit from this family-centred media entertainment in diverse family contexts.","DOI":"10.1080/02614367.2011.568065","ISSN":"0261-4367","shortTitle":"‘Wii play as a family’","author":[{"family":"Chambers","given":"Deborah"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2012",1,1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDyR4XCss5HK}(Chambers,     2012). -   the role of children as the technology experts in some households     []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"8NemwkLI","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Correa et al., 2015; Roque et al., 2016)","plainCitation":"(Correa et al., 2015; Roque et al., 2016)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":6626,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/QBPJ8TJ7"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/QBPJ8TJ7"],"itemData":{"id":6626,"type":"article-journal","title":"Brokering new technologies: The role of children in their parents’ usage of the internet","container-title":"New Media & Society","page":"483-500","volume":"17","issue":"4","source":"Crossref","abstract":"This study investigated to what extent sons and daughters influence their parents’ adoption of digital media, particularly the internet, compared to other influence sources. It also explored structural factors that play a role in this bottom-up process, such as socio-economic differences and gender. Finally, it examined the relationship between this bottom-up technology transmission process and parents’ levels of internet self-efficacy and online activities. Drawing from socialization and diffusion of innovation research and using a self-administered random mail survey, we found that children play a role in including their parents in the digital environment, particularly among women, people who are older (35 years old and above), and belong to lower socio-economic groups. We also found that this bottom-up technology transmission is somewhat negatively associated with parents’ internet self-efficacy. Implications and possible interpretations of these results are discussed.","DOI":"10.1177/1461444813506975","ISSN":"1461-4448, 1461-7315","shortTitle":"Brokering new technologies","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Correa","given":"Teresa"},{"family":"Straubhaar","given":"Joseph D"},{"family":"Chen","given":"Wenhong"},{"family":"Spence","given":"Jeremiah"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2015",4]]}},"label":"page"},{"id":6477,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/FURUF33F"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/FURUF33F"],"itemData":{"id":6477,"type":"paper-conference","title":"“I’m Not Just a Mom”: Parents Developing Multiple Roles in Creative Computing","container-title":"Conference: International Conference of the Learning Sciences","source":"repository.isls.org","abstract":"Creating, designing, and building with computing have gained recognition as important activities for children, but few actually engage in these creative opportunities. Social support from parents can be essential to engaging children, but for parents with limited backgrounds in computing, they are often unsure what roles they can play. For parents to develop supportive roles, they must gain first-hand experience in creative computing for themselves and with their children. In this paper, we examine the experiences of parents participating in a community-based program called Family Creative Learning, where families design and invent together using creative technologies like Scratch. We describe three case studies of how parents developed multiple roles such as collaborator, teacher, and learner as they created and collaborated with their children on technology-based projects. We discuss design opportunities to provide meaningful experiences for parents and children to build projects and build supportive roles around computing.","URL":"https://repository.isls.org//handle/1/177","shortTitle":"“I’m Not Just a Mom”","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Roque","given":"Ricarose"},{"family":"Lin","given":"Karina"},{"family":"Liuzzi","given":"Richard"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2016",7]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2018",10,30]]}},"label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDCrcK4EmDBq}(Correa     et al., 2015; Roque et al., 2016). -   video game play seen as positive for communication bringing families     closer together     []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"6haptZ6K","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(It\\uc0\\u333{} et al., 2010)","plainCitation":"(Itō et al., 2010)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":3072,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/URKI7FTD"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/URKI7FTD"],"itemData":{"id":3072,"type":"book","title":"Hanging out, messing around, and geeking out: kids living and learning with new media","collection-title":"The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation series on digital media and learning","publisher":"MIT Press","publisher-place":"Cambridge, Mass.","number-of-pages":"419","source":"Gemeinsamer Bibliotheksverbund ISBN","event-place":"Cambridge, Mass.","ISBN":"978-0-262-01336-9","note":"OCLC: 699713878","shortTitle":"Hanging out, messing around, and geeking out","language":"eng","editor":[{"family":"Itō","given":"Mizuko"},{"family":"Baumer","given":"Sonja"},{"family":"Bittanti","given":"Matteo"},{"family":"Antin","given":"Judd"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2010"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDZUbD1HsH9w}(Itō     et al., 2010).

Ito describes a spectrum from participation to to creative production and sees the family environment as a suitable spaces for exploratory messing around []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"9pkX1QY0","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(It\\uc0\\u333{}, 2009, p. 44)","plainCitation":"(Itō, 2009, p. 44)","dontUpdate":true,"noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":450,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7GJR38P4"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7GJR38P4"],"itemData":{"id":450,"type":"book","title":"Living and learning with new media: summary of findings from the digital youth project","collection-title":"The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation reports on digital media and learning","publisher":"MIT Press","publisher-place":"Cambridge, Mass","number-of-pages":"98","source":"Library of Congress ISBN","event-place":"Cambridge, Mass","ISBN":"978-0-262-51365-4","call-number":"HQ799.2.M352 U655 2009","shortTitle":"Living and learning with new media","editor":[{"family":"Itō","given":"Mizuko"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2009"]]}},"locator":"44","label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RND84SSzY7TYp}(Itō, 2009, p. 44)

Tensions of Formal & Informal Dimensions & Play as a Solution

Explore the challenge of creating a learning community which brings elements of the informal, ecological into a new environment []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"QgS6IZ5A","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Linehan and McCarthy, 2001)","plainCitation":"(Linehan and McCarthy, 2001)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":6923,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPPQ2ZQ6"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPPQ2ZQ6"],"itemData":{"id":6923,"type":"article-journal","title":"Reviewing the \"Community of Practice\" Metaphor: An Analysis of Control Relations in a Primary School Classroom","container-title":"Mind, Culture, and Activity","page":"129-147","volume":"8","issue":"2","source":"Crossref","DOI":"10.1207/S15327884MCA0802_02","ISSN":"1074-9039, 1532-7884","shortTitle":"Reviewing the \"Community of Practice\" Metaphor","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Linehan","given":"Carol"},{"family":"McCarthy","given":"John"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2001",5]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDaxapunh5pI}(Linehan and McCarthy, 2001).

Similar challenge faced by museams and informal learning spaces wanting to design for choice and draw on family experiences []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"94YHSw8R","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Crowley and Jacobs, 2002; Petrich et al., 2013)","plainCitation":"(Crowley and Jacobs, 2002; Petrich et al., 2013)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":7223,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/8HX82H7D"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/8HX82H7D"],"itemData":{"id":7223,"type":"article-journal","title":"Building islands of expertise in everyday family activity","container-title":"Learning conversations in museums","volume":"333356","author":[{"family":"Crowley","given":"Kevin"},{"family":"Jacobs","given":"Melanie"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2002"]]}},"label":"page"},{"id":3636,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/28RKRJE6"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/28RKRJE6"],"itemData":{"id":3636,"type":"article-journal","title":"It looks like fun but are they learning?","container-title":"Design, Make, Play: Growing the Next Generation of STEM Innovators","page":"50","source":"Google Scholar","author":[{"family":"Petrich","given":"Mike"},{"family":"Wilkinson","given":"Karen"},{"family":"Bevan","given":"Bronwyn"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2013"]]}},"label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDmwwc2qB77Z}(Crowley and Jacobs, 2002; Petrich et al., 2013) as funds of knowledge []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"L5hX3dTT","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Moll et al., 1992)","plainCitation":"(Moll et al., 1992)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":6963,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/EXBRQZWW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/EXBRQZWW"],"itemData":{"id":6963,"type":"article-journal","title":"Funds of Knowledge for Teaching: Using a Qualitative Approach to Connect Homes and Classrooms","container-title":"Theory into Practice","page":"132-141","volume":"31","issue":"2,","source":"Zotero","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Moll","given":"Luis C."},{"family":"Amanti","given":"Cathy"},{"family":"Neff","given":"Deborah"},{"family":"Gonzalez","given":"Norma"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1992"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDbNlpTIHgTU}(Moll et al., 1992).

Bevan and colleagues at the Exploratorium museum in San Fransciso have developed a framework which explores social aspects of tinkering []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"oMPfuYni","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Bevan et al., 2015, p. 53; Petrich et al., 2013)","plainCitation":"(Bevan et al., 2015, p. 53; Petrich et al., 2013)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":3273,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/AKPP78D8"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/AKPP78D8"],"itemData":{"id":3273,"type":"article-journal","title":"Learning Through STEM-Rich Tinkering: Findings From a Jointly Negotiated Research Project Taken Up in Practice","container-title":"Science Education","page":"98-120","volume":"99","issue":"1","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1002/sce.21151","ISSN":"00368326","shortTitle":"Learning Through STEM-Rich Tinkering","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Bevan","given":"Bronwyn"},{"family":"Gutwill","given":"Joshua P."},{"family":"Petrich","given":"Mike"},{"family":"Wilkinson","given":"Karen"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2015",1]]}},"locator":"53","label":"page"},{"id":3636,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/28RKRJE6"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/28RKRJE6"],"itemData":{"id":3636,"type":"article-journal","title":"It looks like fun but are they learning?","container-title":"Design, Make, Play: Growing the Next Generation of STEM Innovators","page":"50","source":"Google Scholar","author":[{"family":"Petrich","given":"Mike"},{"family":"Wilkinson","given":"Karen"},{"family":"Bevan","given":"Bronwyn"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2013"]]}},"label":"page"}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RND8yvZtt4sYT}(Bevan et al., 2015, p. 53; Petrich et al., 2013) notably social learning forms a great part of this framework, and is thus inspirational for this study.

**Play as a Strategy\ **Play offers a way to structure interventions without squeezing the fun out of them.

-   Definition on of play, voluntary, based on choice -   Playful learning approaches & environments

**LINK:** Challenging from a learning design viewpoints, but also requires a different method of assessment / research. A way of describing complex learning environments in detail.

Activity Theory and Informal Learning Contexts

Background of socio cultural approaches. Engestrom linking US and Russian schools.

Overview of parts of AT and third model

Expansive conception of learning and why particularly suited to this intervention.

As the goals of the individuals and the families involved may change as they deepen their participation in the programme. Or shift in and out of individual focus (creativity), family focus, group focus (advance joint learning of creating a game as a group of learners).

Full Description of Methods / Methodology -----------------------------------------

Data Gathering Methods

360, journal, screen capture, interviews

\ 