**Exploring the potential of 'communities of play' to transform undergraduate engagement**

**Background**

Student engagement in university education has been seen as a problem to be addressed, especially given the expansion in participation in recent years. However 'engagement' itself is a problematic, contested term that can be understood in multiple ways (Gourlay, 2015). There is potential for the concept of 'play' to be one of the lenses through which to view engagement, yet current research around the role of play in undergraduate education is limited, largely to the use of games (as opposed to play) as subject-specific learning activities, or as ways of introducing students to the 'logistics' of undergraduate life.

This study aims to contribute to discussion of play by re-conceptualising adult play within education, emphasising the link between playfulness and engagement. This re-conceptualisation will contribute to discourse by challenging the existing use of games and play in higher education, and the way in which undergraduates are inducted into the university community.

In addition, the study will explore a potential strategy for undergraduate education through the development and evaluation of a model of 'communities of play'. It is anticipated that this will also question the uncritical use of 'impact' as a measure for the success of interventions around engagement. In this way, the project will draw together theoretical, practical and ideological transformations of the concepts of play and engagement.

**Methodology**

The educational theory at the heart of the study is constructivist; the theoretical lens of situated learning theory (Lave and Wenger, 1991) will influence the theories of learning and play to be developed (in particular in the overlap between 'communities of practice' and 'communities of play'). Of particular significance here is Gee's (2007) reading of 'communities of practice' through games, which will be central to understanding how play can transform educational engagement. The study will also use pragmatism as its epistemological foundation, especially in its accounting for thought and learning (and by extension play and research) as social actions (Biesta and Burbules, 2003:9).

**Research Questions and Activities**

The project will build upon work at MMU's EdLab by designing innovative educational techniques in collaboration with teaching staff and undergraduate students, who will essentially be treated as co-researchers through their central role in the design process. Whilst the research is not purely design-based, Collins et al's (2004) design-based research guidelines will be used as a foundation for the design process.

The research will focus on the cohort of around sixty Foundation-year Education students beginning their courses at MMU in September 2017. As part of their first year's activities, in collaboration with EdLab, 'communities of play' will be established, through which students will explore their development as new undergraduates. These communities will engage in ongoing collaborative, creative playful activities. Research will take place in the context of this intervention, developing an understanding of students' conceptions of learning, play and engagement beforehand, during and afterwards. It is anticipated that the research will capture the ways in which the experiences of new undergraduates are transformed by becoming part of 'communities of play'.

Design of the intervention and playful research techniques will also be informed by a related EdLab project which is due to take place in early 2017 (Phase 1) with current first-year undergraduates. This project will provide initial understandings of students' attitudes towards adult play, and will act as a pilot for the activities to take place in Phase 2. During Phase 1, six interviews with students and staff on play, learning and engagement will also help to understand individuals' existing experiences.

**Research Methods**

A pragmatic, constructivist and exploratory theoretical approach suggests qualitative methods rather than quantitative ones which might focus on relatively narrow measures of the 'impact' of activities. The questions raised by the literature indicate a potential for moving beyond narrow measures and examining in more depth the ways in which engagement is experienced and understood by the students who are engaged. This has an impact on the goals of the research too; rather than presenting play as a fixed concept and searching for evidence of its impact, the aim is to develop new definitions of 'play' which will in turn illuminate student engagement.

The table below illustrates the three phases of the research process, the questions that each phase is intended to answer and some indication of the methods of collection and analysis of data.

Phase 1 incorporates the initial activities outlined above; over the course of six preliminary interviews to be held during the literature review, an early working conception of the perceived link between learning, play and engagement will be developed.

Phase 2 constitutes the bulk of the research activities to take place around the Foundation Year intervention. Data collection will use a range of qualitative methods, including semi-structured interviews and focus groups with students (focus groups will be used in particular in order to acknowledge the transitionary status

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+ |             | Research    | Data        | Data        | Data        | |             | Question    | Required    | Acquisition | Analysis    | |             |             |             | Methods     | Methods     | +=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+ | > PHASE 1   | 1)  What is | -   Existin | -   Literat | -   Themati | |             |     the     | g           | ure         | c           | |             |     link    |     literat |     Review  |     analysi | |             |     between | ure         |             | s           | |             |     play,   |             | -   Six     |     of      | |             |     learnin | -   Initial |     initial |     intervi | |             | g           |     concept |     intervi | ew          | |             |     and     | s           | ews         |     respons | |             |     engagem |     from    |     with    | es          | |             | ent?        |     staff/s |     Staff   |             | |             |             | tudents     |     and     |             | |             |             |             |     Student |             | |             |             |             | s           |             | +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+ |             | 2)  What    | -   Student | -   Prelimi | -   Themati | |             |     are     |     attitud | nary        | c           | |             |     student | es          |     intervi |     analysi | |             | s'          |     prior   | ews         | s           | |             |     existin |     to      |     and     |     of      | |             | g           |     interve |     focus   |     intervi | |             |     attitud | ntion       |     groups  | ew          | |             | es          |             |     with    |     respons | |             |     towards |             |     three   | es          | |             |     play    |             |     student |     and     | |             |     and     |             |     groups  |     group   | |             |     engagem |             |             |     discuss | |             | ent?        |             |             | ions        | +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+ | > PHASE 2   |             |             |             |             | +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+ |             | 3)  How     | -   Student | -   Weekly  | -   Themati | |             |     does a  |     attitud |     observa | c           | |             |     playful | es          | tion        |     analysi | |             |     interve |     during/ |     of      | s           | |             | ntion       | after       |     student |     of      | |             |     transfo |     interve |     session |     intervi | |             | rm          | ntion       | s           | ew          | |             |     student |             |             |     respons | |             | s           |             | -   Monthly | es,         | |             |     underst |             |     intervi |     group   | |             | andings     |             | ews         |     discuss | |             |     and     |             |     and     | ions        | |             |     attitud |             |     focus   |     and     | |             | es          |             |     groups  |     observa | |             |     of play |             |     with    | tion        | |             |     and     |             |     three   |     data    | |             |     engagem |             |     student |             | |             | ent?        |             |     groups  | -   Hermene | |             |             |             |             | utic        | |             |             |             | -   Reading |     reading | |             |             |             |     of      |     of      | |             |             |             |     playful |     artefac | |             |             |             |     artefac | ts          | |             |             |             | ts          |             | +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+ | > PHASE 3   | 4)  How     | -   Existin | -   Literat | -   Discour | |             |     does a  | g           | ure         | se          | |             |     focus   |     literat |     Review  |     analysi | |             |     on play | ure         |             | s           | |             |     transfo |             | -   Analysi |     of      | |             | rm          | -   Policy  | s           |     policy  | |             |     the     |     around  |     of      |             | |             |     interpr |     play    |     results |             | |             | etation     |     and     |     from    |             | |             |     of      |     engagem |     Phase 1 |             | |             |     engagem | ent         |     and 2   |             | |             | ent         |             |             |             | |             |     as an   |             |             |             | |             |     educati |             |             |             | |             | onal        |             |             |             | |             |     goal?   |             |             |             | +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+ |             | 5)  How     | -   Results | -   Literat | -   Themati | |             |     does    |     of      | ure         | c           | |             |     engagin |     other   |     Review  |     analysi | |             | g           |     questio |             | s           | |             |     in      | ns          | -   Results |     of      | |             |     playful |             |     from    |     researc | |             |     researc | -   Reflect |     Phase 1 | h           | |             | h           | ive         |     and 2   |     data    | |             |     transfo |     thought |             |             | |             | rm          | s           | -   Reflect |             | |             |     concept |     on      | ive         |             | |             | ions        |     researc |     researc |             | |             |     of      | h           | h           |             | |             |     play,   |             |     journal |             | |             |     learnin |             |             |             | |             | g           |             |             |             | |             |     and     |             |             |             | |             |     engagem |             |             |             | |             | ent?        |             |             |             | +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

of the participants who might otherwise feel constrained by more 'official' interviews). Data will also come from observation of the 'communities of play' in action during contact sessions and reading of documents and artefacts created by students. These methods will aim to examine students' behaviours in comparison with the attitudes uncovered in interviews and focus groups. In addition, observations will inform the ongoing design process of the intervention.

Echoing the interpretive emphasis of the research questions, analysis of data from Phases 1 and 2 will be primarily phenomenological. This will involve interrogating students' present experiences and interpretations of the activities, their contributions to sessions, and the meanings of learning, play and engagement from individuals' perspectives. Thematic analysis will provide the primary foundation for this (Boyatzis, 1998), with the codes and patterns developed as part of Phase 1 informing the interview questions and discussion topics in Phase 2.

Phase 3 is largely reflective and transformative, and will not depend upon acquiring new data but relating the data set back to the literature and surrounding policy. Again, thematic analysis will be important here, but critical discourse analysis will explore the context in which the research has taken place, in particular for Question 4.

Reflecting the theme of the study, the methodology will be explicitly playful in its approach throughout, in particular in the way in which it will embrace emergent opportunities to take part in analysis of playful actions and artefacts as research data, and to include research participants as co-researchers. This approach will also be necessarily reflexive, incorporating the researcher as a research subject within a community of play. As these opportunities for playful reflection are created and discovered, they will be incorporated into the research design.

**Key References**

Biesta, G. and Burbules, N. C. (2003) *Pragmatism and educational research.* Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

Boyatzis, R. E. (1998) *Transforming qualitative information : thematic analysis and code development.* Thousand Oaks, Calif ; London: Sage Publications.

Collins, A., Joseph, D. and Bielaczyc, K. (2004) \'Design Research: Theoretical and Methodological Issues.\' *The Journal of the Learning Sciences*, 13(1) pp. 15-42.

Gee, J. P. (2007) *What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy.* Rev. and updated ed. ed., Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Gourlay, L. (2015) \'\'Student engagement\' and the tyranny of participation.\' *Teaching in Higher Education*, 20(4) pp. 402-411.

Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) *Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation.* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 