Investigating the potential of collaborative multi-generational game making using code playgrounds Background

This study seeks greater understanding of processes of the formation of playful game making communities to enhance computing provision in informal learning spaces.

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology and subsequent lag in associated teaching strategies is addressed in a recent report on UK computer education []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"c2kbMLuk","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","plainCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4655,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"itemData":{"id":4655,"type":"report","title":"After the Reboot: computing education in UK Schools","source":"ResearchGate","shortTitle":"After the Reboot","author":[{"literal":"The Royal Society"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2017"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDdI6bFgy2Au}(The Royal Society, 2017) Wing's conception of computational thinking, which is foregrounded in the report as a key component of a computing curriculum, will be critically evaluated in this study []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dET7a6dL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(2006)","plainCitation":"(2006)"},"citationItems":[{"id":293,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"itemData":{"id":293,"type":"article-journal","title":"Computational thinking","container-title":"Communications of the ACM","page":"33","volume":"49","issue":"3","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1145/1118178.1118215","ISSN":"00010782","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Wing","given":"Jeannette M."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2006",3,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDO9wO5ZBWdD}(2006). The report also highlights the potential of digital game making and need for more research into this area.

Beyond formal education, there is strong potential for game making in informal learning in museums, libraries and after school clubs via initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo. Here, non-expert volunteers and younger participants form intergenerational learning communities about which there is currently sparse research []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"BUwI5yyj","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Cucinelli et al., 2018)","plainCitation":"(Cucinelli et al., 2018)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4630,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/KCBN2ALC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/KCBN2ALC"],"itemData":{"id":4630,"type":"article-journal","title":"Intergenerational Learning Through a Participatory Video Game Design Workshop","container-title":"Journal of Intergenerational Relationships","page":"146-165","volume":"16","issue":"1-2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/15350770.2018.1404855","ISSN":"1535-0770, 1535-0932","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Cucinelli","given":"Giuliana"},{"family":"Davidson","given":"Ann-Louise"},{"family":"Romero","given":"Margarida"},{"family":"Matheson","given":"Tristan"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2018",4,3]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDcbf1OWkYAE}(Cucinelli et al., 2018).

This study will examine a learning environment comprising of diverse pathways and media, a focus present at genesis of studies of digital game making and one explored by Papert and Turkle []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"7aJb2EU4","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1990)","plainCitation":"(1990)"},"citationItems":[{"id":3905,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"itemData":{"id":3905,"type":"article-journal","title":"Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete","container-title":"Signs","volume":"16","issue":"1","URL":"http://www.papert.org/articles/EpistemologicalPluralism.html","author":[{"family":"Papert","given":"Seymour"},{"family":"Turkle","given":"Sherry"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1990"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2017",11,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDimIoUAxPPq}(1990). While their studies highlighted the pluralism of approaches possible rich game making ecologies involving both digital and physical objects, many subsequent studies focus on particular software tools and thus deemphasise the playful possibilities of material and social activities.

While participatory culture is widely applied term, questions around the appropriation of popular technologies and practices by families and other multi-age groups are directly relevant to this study []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dQE4WMNr","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Sch\\uc0\\u228{}fer, 2011)}","plainCitation":"(Schäfer, 2011)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4586,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"itemData":{"id":4586,"type":"book","title":"Bastard culture! how user participation transforms cultural production","collection-title":"MediaMatters","publisher":"Amsterdam University Press","publisher-place":"Amsterdam","number-of-pages":"249","source":"Library of Congress ISBN","event-place":"Amsterdam","ISBN":"978-90-8964-256-1","call-number":"HM651 .S33 2011","note":"OCLC: ocn730264174","author":[{"family":"Schäfer","given":"Mirko Tobias"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2011"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDqvJM2yJd5S}(Schäfer, 2011).

Can the reappropriation of game mechanics, assets and narratives of video games shared between participants facilitate collaboration between generations and if so how can this best happen?

**Theoretical Framework **Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study, in particular the social collaborative elements of the theory. This study is influenced by the applied constructivist approaches of student centred learning, particularly the aspects of feedback collaboration and learner autonomy []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"DklhkuUm","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)","plainCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4359,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"itemData":{"id":4359,"type":"article-journal","title":"Rich environments for active learning: a definition","container-title":"ALT-J","page":"5-34","volume":"3","issue":"2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/0968776950030202","ISSN":"0968-7769, 1741-1629","shortTitle":"Rich environments for active learning","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Grabinger","given":"R. Scott"},{"family":"Dunlap","given":"Joanna C."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1995",1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RND1v3Qmw61ir}(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995). Additionally, a constructionist lens will be used to describe educational application of constructivist concepts focusing on the role of physical materials and digital objects in the learning process.

Activity theory will be used to represent complexity of learning process to go beyond efficacy of interventions to study interactions including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"orLZNmkL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Engestr\\uc0\\u246{}m, 1999)}","plainCitation":"(Engeström, 1999)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4686,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"itemData":{"id":4686,"type":"chapter","title":"Activity Theory and Individual and Social Transformation","container-title":"Perspectives on Activity Theory","publisher":"Cambridge University Press","page":"19–38","source":"PhilPapers","author":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"}],"editor":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"},{"family":"Miettinen","given":"Reijo"},{"family":"Punamäki-Gitai","given":"Raija-Leena"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1999"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDF404OFbBhM}(Engeström, 1999).\

+--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+

Methods and Activities

Data gathering will be undertaken in stages. Stage one (RQ1) includes a pilot of a minimum of eight 2 hours sessions with pilot group (home education families), four interviews with practitioners in the field and four with families active in the field. Stage two (RQ2,4) incorporates a co-design approach using participant information from RQ1 to create a framework. Testing of data gathering methods is also carried out in three pilot workshops. Stage three RQ3,4) comprises data gathering via two iterations of eight two hour sessions with target groups (see table). Stage four includes analysis of data and writing up of results.

As facilitator, I will take the role of participant observer. I will take notes in sessions, and supplement them with extensive journal entries and use of recording equipment.

Game making will happen at stations exploring different media and activities, including graphic, audio, coding and narrative planning. Video cameras will record activity at each of the stations. Where coding happens video screen capture and audio recordings will be made.

Data Analysis

A literature review will inform research design and creation of a thematic coding scheme to analyse pilot workshop observations. I will use activity theory to analyse interviews of participants in game making communities to prototype activity systems of participants, practices and materials.

The focal areas of this study are hard to capture in simplistic ways, To cover the rich learning environment will involve extensive digital recordings. A thick approach to data gathering will produce a lot of data including 360 video of stations, to capture general interaction, screen and audio capture of coding and creation of audio and graphical assets.

I will be looking for key interactions identified in my journal which illustrate transformation moments or have potential to illuminate focal and emergent areas. Activity systems created as part of RQ1 and 2 will then be evolved using new data and used to enrich a pedagogic framework and associated observations.

The following areas are of particular interest given the background of this study and I anticipate they will be of interest when results are analysed; transformations surrounding attitudes to participation in digital making cultures, impact of learning design in engagement of female participants, complementary role of physical materials in a digital making environment. 