Investigating the potential of collaborative multi-generational game making using code playgrounds

Background

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology has lead to a lag in associated teaching strategies. Digital literacy and informed participation in digital spaces are challenges being addressed by both formal and informal learning spaces. In formal provision, a recent report on computer education has highlighted the potential of the use of games making and lack of research on this subject []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"c2kbMLuk","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","plainCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4655,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"itemData":{"id":4655,"type":"report","title":"After the Reboot: computing education in UK Schools","source":"ResearchGate","shortTitle":"After the Reboot","author":[{"literal":"The Royal Society"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2017"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDdI6bFgy2Au}(The Royal Society, 2017). The potential value of game making

A key area of interest for me is intergenerational / multiage and family learning. This research has potential to benefit practitioners in "third spaces" including museums, libraries and after school clubs. Indeed, initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo already exists in these spaces and involve game making elements with multi generational elements provided by student volunteers.

In game playing much has been made of activities surrounding the playing in game playing communities []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"Lk9s2uWy","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Gee, 2004)","plainCitation":"(Gee, 2004)"},"citationItems":[{"id":2561,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/M6377K76"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/M6377K76"],"itemData":{"id":2561,"type":"book","title":"What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy","collection-title":"Education","publisher":"Palgrave Macmillan","publisher-place":"New York, NY","number-of-pages":"225","edition":"1. paperback ed","source":"Gemeinsamer Bibliotheksverbund ISBN","event-place":"New York, NY","ISBN":"978-1-4039-6538-7","note":"OCLC: 255334132","language":"eng","author":[{"family":"Gee","given":"James Paul"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2004"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDld34sy8Xb1}(Gee, 2004). I anticipate that the priorities of participants will not follow a narrow definition of computation thinking skills []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"RRPdHIBV","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Wing, 2006)","plainCitation":"(Wing, 2006)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4134,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/XIX2G9BQ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/XIX2G9BQ"],"itemData":{"id":4134,"type":"article-journal","title":"Computational thinking","container-title":"Communications of the ACM","page":"33","volume":"49","issue":"3","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1145/1118178.1118215","ISSN":"00010782","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Wing","given":"Jeannette M."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2006",3,1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDSc7Q0F9Wy3}(Wing, 2006). I propose to study how barriers to digital game making are addressed by multiple paths and mediums for learners. The goals is greater understanding of means and processes for the formation of playful game making communities.

While a focus on multiple learner paths and styles were present at genesis of studies of game making and initially explored by Papert and Turkle []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"7aJb2EU4","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1990)","plainCitation":"(1990)"},"citationItems":[{"id":3905,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"itemData":{"id":3905,"type":"article-journal","title":"Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete","container-title":"Signs","volume":"16","issue":"1","URL":"http://www.papert.org/articles/EpistemologicalPluralism.html","author":[{"family":"Papert","given":"Seymour"},{"family":"Turkle","given":"Sherry"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1990"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2017",11,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDimIoUAxPPq}(1990), many digital game making studies are for the most part focused on use of particular software tools and thus deemphasise linked, non-software activities. There is certainly more to learn about the impact of richer game making ecologies involving non-digital, non-coding activities bound in a learning design environment highlighting learner control.

Participatory culture is widely applied term with several strands. The question of how technologies and practices are appropriated by users is directly relevant to this study []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dQE4WMNr","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Sch\\uc0\\u228{}fer, 2011)}","plainCitation":"(Schäfer, 2011)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4586,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"itemData":{"id":4586,"type":"book","title":"Bastard culture! how user participation transforms cultural production","collection-title":"MediaMatters","publisher":"Amsterdam University Press","publisher-place":"Amsterdam","number-of-pages":"249","source":"Library of Congress ISBN","event-place":"Amsterdam","ISBN":"978-90-8964-256-1","call-number":"HM651 .S33 2011","note":"OCLC: ocn730264174","author":[{"family":"Schäfer","given":"Mirko Tobias"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2011"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDqvJM2yJd5S}(Schäfer, 2011). While game making approaches can require expensive hardware and software, this study will embrace a DIY aesthetic to lower costs and ensure replicability. Design decisions will be employed to lower barriers to participants' ownership of and potential co-option of production techniques []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"d1SjGHOX","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Gauntlett, 2011)","plainCitation":"(Gauntlett, 2011)"},"citationItems":[{"id":760,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/FIX6BKD6"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/FIX6BKD6"],"itemData":{"id":760,"type":"book","title":"Making is Connecting: The Social Meaning of Creativity, from DIY and Knitting to YouTube and Web 2.0","publisher":"Polity Press","publisher-place":"Cambridge, UK ; Malden, MA","number-of-pages":"232","edition":"1 edition","source":"Amazon","event-place":"Cambridge, UK ; Malden, MA","abstract":"In  Making is Connecting, David Gauntlett argues that, through making things, people engage with the world and create connections with each other. Both online and offline, we see that people want to make their mark on the world, and to make connections.  During the previous century, the production of culture became dominated by professional elite producers. But today, a vast array of people are making and sharing their own ideas, videos and other creative material online, as well as engaging in real–world crafts, art projects and hands–on experiences.  Gauntlett argues that we are seeing a shift from a ‘sit–back–and–be–told culture′ to a ‘making–and–doing culture′. People are rejecting traditional teaching and television, and making their own learning and entertainment instead. Drawing on evidence from psychology, politics, philosophy and economics, he shows how this shift is necessary and essential for the happiness and survival of modern societies.","ISBN":"978-0-7456-5002-9","shortTitle":"Making is Connecting","language":"English","author":[{"family":"Gauntlett","given":"David"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2011",3,4]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDMuLUu49npV}(Gauntlett, 2011). This low-fi approach will be present in the use of recycled computer, cut and paste graphics and low cost physical objects to aid game protoyping.

The use of Code Playgrounds to create web games collaboratively are central to this study. Code Playgrounds are websites which allow users to easily arrange snippets of HTML, css and javascript code to see a live preview of a resulting webpage. Users value the immediate feedback when changes are made and the ability to share code with no technical overhead. Originally a quick tech solution to complement support forums Code Playgrounds like codepen.io have developed collaboration and community facilities which have interesting potential in collaborative educational environments. As the web is an authentic environment. There are well established tools and processes to help peer production which can be adapted for our participants.

Theoretical Framework

Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study, in particular the social collaborative elements of the theory.

A Constructionist lens will be used to describe educational application of constructivist concepts focusing on the role of physical materials and digital objects in the learning process .

Activity theory will be used to represent complexity of learning process to go beyond efficacy of interventions to study interactions including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies.\

+----------------------------------------------------+--+--+ |                                                    |  |  | +----------------------------------------------------+--+--+ |                                                    |  |  | +----------------------------------------------------+--+--+ |                                                    |  |  | +----------------------------------------------------+--+--+ | On                                                 |  |  | |                                                    |  |  | | agency, meta cognition, feedback and collaborating |  |  | +----------------------------------------------------+--+--+ |                                                    |  |  | +----------------------------------------------------+--+--+

Methods and Activities

Data gathering will be undertaken in stages. Each stage will build on the next. For brevity, a table is used to set out the studies research questions in chronological order and summarise the data gathering and analysis process. Stages 1-3 will last one year and stage 4 will last two years.

-   Stage One: Pilot: study of minimum of 10 x 2 hours sessions with     target group (local school / home education families), practitioner     and target audience interviews -   Stage Two: Design: Design of framework and testing of data gathering     methods -   Stage Three: Implementation: Authentic gathering of data via two     iterations of 10 x 2 hour session with target group -   Stage Four: Analysis of data and writing up of results

Detail on Methods:

The game making environment will be based around different asset making stations. Specifics of the components of the station will be informed be stage one but will include ability to work on graphical and audio assets and supported narrative planning.

As a facilitator of this process I will take the role of participant observer. I will take notes in sessions, and supplement them with extensive journal entries and use of recording equipment. Video cameras will record activity at each of the stations. At stations where participatory game coding in Code Playground happens video screen capture and audio recordings will be made.

Data Analysis

A literature review will inform research design as well as a thematic coding scheme to analyse observations recorded in later stages.

I will use activity theory to analyse interview of practitioners in multi-age game making communities. From this I will map potential activity systems built around intersecting game making practices and materials.

Due to the rich naturalistic nature of the environment I will be looking for key interactions identified in my journal which illustrate transformation moments or have potential to illuminate significant issues identified in participant learning.

The following areas are of particular interest given the background of this study and I anticipate they will be of interest when results are analysed; transformations surrounding attitudes to participation in digital making cultures, impact of learning design in engagement of female participants, complementary role of physical materials in a digital making environment. 