**Investigating the potential of collaborative multi-generational game making using code playgrounds**

**Background**

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology has lead to a lag in associated teaching strategies. Digital literacy and informed participation in digital spaces are challenges being addressed by both formal and informal learning spaces. In formal provision, a recent report on computer education has highlighted the potential of the use of games making and lack of research on this subject (The Royal Society, 2017). The potential value of game making

A key area of interest for me is intergenerational / multiage and family learning. This research has potential to benefit practitioners in "third spaces" including museums, libraries and after school clubs. Indeed, initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo already exists in these spaces and involve game making elements with multi generational elements provided by student volunteers.

In game playing much has been made of activities surrounding the playing in game playing communities (Gee, 2004). I anticipate that the priorities of participants will not follow a narrow definition of computation thinking skills (Wing, 2006). I propose to study how barriers to digital game making are addressed by multiple paths and mediums for learners. The goals is greater understanding of means and processes for the formation of playful game making communities.

While a focus on multiple learner paths and styles were present at genesis of studies of game making and initially explored by Papert and Turkle (1990), many digital game making studies are for the most part focused on use of particular software tools and thus deemphasise linked, non-software activities. There is certainly more to learn about the impact of richer game making ecologies involving non-digital, non-coding activities bound in a learning design environment highlighting learner control.

Participatory culture is widely applied term with several strands. The question of how technologies and practices are appropriated by users is directly relevant to this study (Schäfer, 2011). While game making approaches can require expensive hardware and software, this study will embrace a DIY aesthetic to lower costs and ensure replicability. Design decisions will be employed to lower barriers to participants' ownership of and potential co-option of production techniques (Gauntlett, 2011). This low-fi approach will be present in the use of recycled computer, cut and paste graphics and low cost physical objects to aid game protoyping.

The use of Code Playgrounds to create web games collaboratively are central to this study. Code Playgrounds are websites which allow users to easily arrange snippets of HTML, css and javascript code to see a live preview of a resulting webpage. Users value the immediate feedback when changes are made and the ability to share code with no technical overhead. Originally a quick tech solution to complement support forums Code Playgrounds like codepen.io have developed collaboration and community facilities which have interesting potential in collaborative educational environments. As the web is an authentic environment. There are well established tools and processes to help peer production which can be adapted for our participants.

**Theoretical Framework **

Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study, in particular the social collaborative elements of the theory.

A Constructionist lens will be used to describe educational application of constructivist concepts focusing on the role of physical materials and digital objects in the learning process .

Activity theory will be used to represent complexity of learning process to go beyond efficacy of interventions to study interactions including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies.

**Methods and Activities**

Data gathering will be undertaken in stages. Each stage will build on the next. For brevity, a table used to set out the studies research questions in chronological order and summarise the data gathering and analysis process.

In stage one (Questions 1 & 2) research will take the form of a literature review, one or two pilot schemes of 10 sessions and interviews with participants and facilitators of game making environments. Reflections from this phase will shape the issues studied and inform the design of stage two.

Stage two will involve creating an evolved experimental design around regular game making activities involving Greater Manchester families. Home education networks and primary schools involved with Code Club will be the source for participants. Several iterations of weekly two to three month game making

The game making environment will be based around different asset making stations. Specifics of the components of the station will be informed be stage one but will include ability to work on graphical and audio assets and supported narrative planning.

As a facilitator of this process I will take the role of participant observer. I will take notes in sessions, and supplement them with extensive journal entries and use of recording equipment. Video cameras will record activity at each of the stations. At stations where participatory game coding in Code Playground happens video screen capture and audio recordings will be made.

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Question              | Data Collection       | Data Analysis         | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | 1)  What methods      | -   Literature Review | -   Identify themes,  | |     exist to best     |                       |     and pilot         | |     study learning    |                       |     activities from   | |     and collaboration |                       |     literature        | |     in digital game   |                       |                       | |     making            |                       |                       | |     environment?      |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | 2)  What are families | -   Semi-structured   | -   Analysis of       | |     and facilitators  |     interviews with   |     interviews to     | |     attitudes to      |     family groups,    |     identify themes   | |     collaborative     |     students and      |                       | |     digital           |     digital game      | -   Evaluation of     | |     production?       |     leaning           |     pilot activities  | |                       |     facilitators      |                       | |                       |                       |                       | |                       | -   Observation of    |                       | |                       |     pilot study       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | 3)  What are the      | -   Observations of   | -   Ethnography       | |     implications for  |     game making       |                       | |     learning of       |     sessions in       | -   Analysis of       | |     multiple learning |     journal           |     interactions via  | |     paths and         |                       |     activity theory   | |     collaboration in  | -   Regular           |                       | |     a digital game    |     Interviews with   |                       | |     making            |     participants      |                       | |     environment?      |                       |                       | |                       | -   Video recordings  |                       | |                       |     of Observations   |                       | |                       |     of                |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | 4)  What are the      | -   Collection of     | -   Emergent analysis | |     strengths and     |     digital artefacts |     of digital        | |     weaknesses of the |     created           |     artefacts         | |     use of code       |                       |                       | |     playgrounds to    | -   Screen capture    | -   Analysis of       | |     enable (and       |     and audio         |     recorded          | |     measure)          |     recording         |     interactions via  | |     participant       |     collaborative     |     activity theory   | |     collaboration?\   |     coding            |                       | |     OR What happens   |                       |                       | |     to participants   |                       |                       | |     conceptions of    |                       |                       | |     technology use    |                       |                       | |     when they are     |                       |                       | |     involved in game  |                       |                       | |     coding and asset  |                       |                       | |     creation          |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | 5)  What happens to   | -   Reflection on     | -   Analysis of       | |     learning when     |     previous journal  |     previous finding  | |     participants      |     observations      |     via activity      | |     collaborate in    |                       |     theory            | |     multi-age /       | -   Results of        |                       | |     multi-generationa |     questions 3 & 4   |                       | | l                     |                       |                       | |     game making       |                       |                       | |     communities?      |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

**Data Analysis **

Gauntlett, D., 2011. Making is Connecting: The Social Meaning of Creativity, from DIY and Knitting to YouTube and Web 2.0, 1 edition. ed. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK ; Malden, MA.

Gee, J.P., 2004. What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy, 1. paperback ed. ed, Education. Palgrave Macmillan, New York, NY.

Papert, S., Turkle, S., 1990. Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete. Signs 16.

Schäfer, M.T., 2011. Bastard culture! how user participation transforms cultural production, MediaMatters. Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam.

The Royal Society, 2017. After the Reboot: computing education in UK Schools.

Wing, J.M., 2006. Computational thinking. Commun. ACM 49, 33. https://doi.org/10.1145/1118178.1118215 