Investigating the potential of collaborative multi-generational game making using code playgrounds Background

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology and subsequent lag in associated teaching strategies is addressed in a recent report on UK computer education []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"c2kbMLuk","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","plainCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4655,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"itemData":{"id":4655,"type":"report","title":"After the Reboot: computing education in UK Schools","source":"ResearchGate","shortTitle":"After the Reboot","author":[{"literal":"The Royal Society"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2017"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDdI6bFgy2Au}(The Royal Society, 2017) Wing's conception of computational thinking, which is foregrounded in the report as a key component of a computing curriculum, will be critically evaluated in this study []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dET7a6dL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(2006)","plainCitation":"(2006)"},"citationItems":[{"id":293,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"itemData":{"id":293,"type":"article-journal","title":"Computational thinking","container-title":"Communications of the ACM","page":"33","volume":"49","issue":"3","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1145/1118178.1118215","ISSN":"00010782","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Wing","given":"Jeannette M."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2006",3,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDO9wO5ZBWdD}(2006). The report also highlights the potential of digital game making and need for more research into this area.

Beyond formal education, there is strong potential for game making in informal learning in museums, libraries and after school clubs via initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo. Here, non-expert volunteers and younger participants form intergenerational learning communities. More in intergenerational []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"BUwI5yyj","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Cucinelli et al., 2018)","plainCitation":"(Cucinelli et al., 2018)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4630,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/KCBN2ALC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/KCBN2ALC"],"itemData":{"id":4630,"type":"article-journal","title":"Intergenerational Learning Through a Participatory Video Game Design Workshop","container-title":"Journal of Intergenerational Relationships","page":"146-165","volume":"16","issue":"1-2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/15350770.2018.1404855","ISSN":"1535-0770, 1535-0932","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Cucinelli","given":"Giuliana"},{"family":"Davidson","given":"Ann-Louise"},{"family":"Romero","given":"Margarida"},{"family":"Matheson","given":"Tristan"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2018",4,3]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDcbf1OWkYAE}(Cucinelli et al., 2018).

This study will examine a learning environment comprising of diverse pathways and media, a focus present at genesis of studies of digital game making and one explored by Papert and Turkle []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"7aJb2EU4","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1990)","plainCitation":"(1990)"},"citationItems":[{"id":3905,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"itemData":{"id":3905,"type":"article-journal","title":"Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete","container-title":"Signs","volume":"16","issue":"1","URL":"http://www.papert.org/articles/EpistemologicalPluralism.html","author":[{"family":"Papert","given":"Seymour"},{"family":"Turkle","given":"Sherry"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1990"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2017",11,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDimIoUAxPPq}(1990). While their studies highlighted the pluralism of approaches possible rich game making ecologies involving both digital and physical objects, many subsequent studies focus on particular software tools and thus deemphasise the playful possibilities of linked, non-software activities.

With in the broad framework of collaborative learning , this study is influence by the approaches of student centred learning, with a particular focus on the impact of feedback and metacognition on learner autonomy.

Participatory culture is widely applied term with several strands. The question of how technologies and practices are appropriated by users is directly relevant to this study []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dQE4WMNr","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Sch\\uc0\\u228{}fer, 2011)}","plainCitation":"(Schäfer, 2011)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4586,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"itemData":{"id":4586,"type":"book","title":"Bastard culture! how user participation transforms cultural production","collection-title":"MediaMatters","publisher":"Amsterdam University Press","publisher-place":"Amsterdam","number-of-pages":"249","source":"Library of Congress ISBN","event-place":"Amsterdam","ISBN":"978-90-8964-256-1","call-number":"HM651 .S33 2011","note":"OCLC: ocn730264174","author":[{"family":"Schäfer","given":"Mirko Tobias"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2011"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDqvJM2yJd5S}(Schäfer, 2011). While game making approaches can require expensive hardware and software, this study will embrace a DIY aesthetic to lower costs and ensure replicability.

The goal is greater understanding of means and processes for the formation of playful game making communities.

**Theoretical Framework **Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study, in particular the social collaborative elements of the theory.

A Constructionist lens will be used to describe educational application of constructivist concepts focusing on the role of physical materials and digital objects in the learning process

Activity theory will be used to represent complexity of learning process to go beyond efficacy of interventions to study interactions including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"orLZNmkL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Engestr\\uc0\\u246{}m, 1999)}","plainCitation":"(Engeström, 1999)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4686,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"itemData":{"id":4686,"type":"chapter","title":"Activity Theory and Individual and Social Transformation","container-title":"Perspectives on Activity Theory","publisher":"Cambridge University Press","page":"19–38","source":"PhilPapers","author":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"}],"editor":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"},{"family":"Miettinen","given":"Reijo"},{"family":"Punamäki-Gitai","given":"Raija-Leena"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1999"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDF404OFbBhM}(Engeström, 1999).\

+--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+ |  |  |  | +--+--+--+

Methods and Activities

Data gathering will be undertaken in stages. Stage one (RQ1) includes a pilot of a minimum of eight 2 hours sessions with pilot group (home education families), four interviews with practitioners in the field and four with families active in the field.

Stage two (RQ2) incorporates a co-design approach using participant information from RQ1 to create a framework. Testing of data gathering methods are also carried out in one off pilot workshops.

Stage three: Implementation: Authentic gathering of data via two iterations of 10 x 2 hour session with target group

-   Stage Four: Analysis of data and writing up of results

Detail on Methods:

The game making environment will be based around different asset making stations. Specifics of the components of the station will be informed be stage one but will include ability to work on graphical and audio assets and supported narrative planning.

Code playgrounds?

As a facilitator of this process I will take the role of participant observer. I will take notes in sessions, and supplement them with extensive journal entries and use of recording equipment. Video cameras will record activity at each of the stations. At stations where participatory game coding in Code Playground happens video screen capture and audio recordings will be made.

Data Analysis

A literature review will inform research design as well as a thematic coding scheme to analyse observations recorded in later stages.

I will use activity theory to analyse interview of practitioners in multi-age game making communities. From this I will map potential activity systems built around intersecting game making practices and materials.

Due to the rich naturalistic nature of the environment I will be looking for key interactions identified in my journal which illustrate transformation moments or have potential to illuminate significant issues identified in participant learning.

The following areas are of particular interest given the background of this study and I anticipate they will be of interest when results are analysed; transformations surrounding attitudes to participation in digital making cultures, impact of learning design in engagement of female participants, complementary role of physical materials in a digital making environment. 