Investigating the potential of collaborative intergenerational game making

Background

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology and the subsequent lag in associated teaching strategies is addressed in a recent report on UK computer education []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"c2kbMLuk","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","plainCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4655,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"itemData":{"id":4655,"type":"report","title":"After the Reboot: computing education in UK Schools","source":"ResearchGate","shortTitle":"After the Reboot","author":[{"literal":"The Royal Society"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2017"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDdI6bFgy2Au}(The Royal Society, 2017). The report highlights the potential of digital game making to enhance computing provision and need for more research into this area. It also foregrounds Wing's conception of computational thinking, which prioritises abstract thought processes and pre-planning, as a key component of a computing curriculum []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dET7a6dL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(2006)","plainCitation":"(2006)"},"citationItems":[{"id":293,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"itemData":{"id":293,"type":"article-journal","title":"Computational thinking","container-title":"Communications of the ACM","page":"33","volume":"49","issue":"3","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1145/1118178.1118215","ISSN":"00010782","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Wing","given":"Jeannette M."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2006",3,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDO9wO5ZBWdD}(2006).

Game making is already happening in informal settings including museums, libraries and after school clubs via initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo. Here, non-expert volunteers and younger participants form intergenerational learning communities to create games together using accessible technology []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"BUwI5yyj","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Cucinelli et al., 2018)","plainCitation":"(Cucinelli et al., 2018)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4630,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/KCBN2ALC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/KCBN2ALC"],"itemData":{"id":4630,"type":"article-journal","title":"Intergenerational Learning Through a Participatory Video Game Design Workshop","container-title":"Journal of Intergenerational Relationships","page":"146-165","volume":"16","issue":"1-2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/15350770.2018.1404855","ISSN":"1535-0770, 1535-0932","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Cucinelli","given":"Giuliana"},{"family":"Davidson","given":"Ann-Louise"},{"family":"Romero","given":"Margarida"},{"family":"Matheson","given":"Tristan"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2018",4,3]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDcbf1OWkYAE}(Cucinelli et al., 2018). While these environments have great potential to inform practice in digital making, teaching of computing and intergenerational approaches, sparse research exists.

This is disappointing as pioneers of game making Papert and Turkle explored the value of diverse learner pathways, social approaches and multiple media in learning environments in early studies []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"7aJb2EU4","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1990)","plainCitation":"(1990)"},"citationItems":[{"id":3905,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"itemData":{"id":3905,"type":"article-journal","title":"Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete","container-title":"Signs","volume":"16","issue":"1","URL":"http://www.papert.org/articles/EpistemologicalPluralism.html","author":[{"family":"Papert","given":"Seymour"},{"family":"Turkle","given":"Sherry"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1990"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2017",11,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDimIoUAxPPq}(1990). However many subsequent studies in field have prioritised individual computing progress using particular software tools rather than playful possibilities of material and community activities to support learner autonomy and collaboration in digital making.

In light of this, this study will draw on the potential video games as a cultural object around which rich learning communities form. The resulting focus will be an exploration of optimal strategies for the playful re-appropriation of game mechanics, assets and narratives of video games influenced by conceptions of participatory culture []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"ZR8bcTQA","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Sch\\uc0\\u228{}fer, 2011)}","plainCitation":"(Schäfer, 2011)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4586,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/HH8D7RYC"],"itemData":{"id":4586,"type":"book","title":"Bastard culture! how user participation transforms cultural production","collection-title":"MediaMatters","publisher":"Amsterdam University Press","publisher-place":"Amsterdam","number-of-pages":"249","source":"Library of Congress ISBN","event-place":"Amsterdam","ISBN":"978-90-8964-256-1","call-number":"HM651 .S33 2011","note":"OCLC: ocn730264174","author":[{"family":"Schäfer","given":"Mirko Tobias"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2011"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDa38gXCRd6P}(Schäfer, 2011).

Theoretical Framework

Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study, in particular the social collaborative elements of the theory. This study is influenced by the applied constructivist approaches of student centred learning, particularly the aspects of feedback, collaboration and learner autonomy []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"DklhkuUm","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)","plainCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4359,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"itemData":{"id":4359,"type":"article-journal","title":"Rich environments for active learning: a definition","container-title":"ALT-J","page":"5-34","volume":"3","issue":"2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/0968776950030202","ISSN":"0968-7769, 1741-1629","shortTitle":"Rich environments for active learning","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Grabinger","given":"R. Scott"},{"family":"Dunlap","given":"Joanna C."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1995",1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RND1v3Qmw61ir}(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995). Additionally, a constructionist lens will further describe the application of constructivist concepts through a focus on the roles of physical materials and digital objects in the learning process.

Activity theory will be used to represent complexity of learning process including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"orLZNmkL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"{\\rtf (Engestr\\uc0\\u246{}m, 1999)}","plainCitation":"(Engeström, 1999)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4686,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"itemData":{"id":4686,"type":"chapter","title":"Activity Theory and Individual and Social Transformation","container-title":"Perspectives on Activity Theory","publisher":"Cambridge University Press","page":"19–38","source":"PhilPapers","author":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"}],"editor":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"},{"family":"Miettinen","given":"Reijo"},{"family":"Punamäki-Gitai","given":"Raija-Leena"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1999"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDF404OFbBhM}(Engeström, 1999).\

  -- -- --                                                -- -- --

Methods and Activities

Data gathering will be undertaken in stages. Stage one (RQ1) includes a pilot of eight two hours sessions with pilot group (home education families), four interviews with practitioners in the field and four with families active in the field. Stage two (RQ2,4) incorporates a co-design approach using participant information from RQ1 to create a pedagogical framework. Testing of data gathering methods is also carried out in three pilot workshops. Stage three (RQ3,4) comprises data gathering via two iterations of eight two hour sessions with target groups (see table). Stage four includes analysis of data and writing up of results.

As facilitator, I will take the role of participant observer. The focus on user perspective of the learning environment suits the adoption of ethnographic methods including note taking in sessions, supplementary journal entries, study of artefacts created and digital recordings.

Game making will happen at stations exploring different media and activities, including graphics, audio, coding and narrative planning and will be captured using wide-angle video of physical interactions, video screen capture of computer-based interactions.

To enhance data on the user perspective, I will explore methods to recording participant reactions as recorded logs of during the progress of sessions. Follow up interviews will be arranged to study areas of emerging interest.

Data Analysis

A literature review will inform research design and creation of a thematic coding scheme to analyse pilot workshop observations. I will use activity theory to analyse interviews of participants in game making communities to prototype activity systems of participants, practices and materials.

I will be looking for key interactions identified in my journal which may illuminate focal and emergent areas. Recordings of these key moments will be analysed with a particular focus on group dynamics using interaction process analysis []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"xHG3oDJ5","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Bales, 2001)","plainCitation":"(Bales, 2001)"},"citationItems":[{"id":4747,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/2C77KCDE"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/2C77KCDE"],"itemData":{"id":4747,"type":"book","title":"Social Interaction Systems: Theory and Measurement","publisher":"Transaction Publishers","publisher-place":"New Brunswick, NJ","number-of-pages":"417","edition":"1 edition","source":"Amazon","event-place":"New Brunswick, NJ","abstract":"Social Interaction Systems is the culmination of a half century of work in the field of social psychology by Robert Freed Bales, a pioneer at the Department of Social Relations at Harvard University. Led by Talcott Parsons, Gordon W. Allport, Henry A. Murray, and Clyde M. Kluckhohn, the Harvard Project was intended to establish an integrative framework for social psychology, one based on the interaction process, augmented by value content analysis. Bales sees this approach as a personal involvement that goes far beyond the classical experimental approach to the study of groups.Bales developed SYMLOG, which stands for systematic multiple level observation of groups. The SYMLOG Consulting Group approach was worldwide as well as interactive. It created a data bank that made possible a search for general laws of human interaction far beyond anything thus far known. In his daringsearch for universal features, Bales redefines the fundamental boundaries of the field, and in so doing establishes criteria for the behavior and values of leaders and followers. Bales offers a new \"field theory,\" an appreciation of the multiple contexts in which people live.Bales does not aim to eradicate differences, but to understand them. In this sense, the values inherent in any interaction situation permit the psychologist to appreciate the sources of polarization as they actually exist: between conservative and liberal, individualistic and authoritarian, libertarian and communitarian. Bales repeatedly emphasizes that the mental processes of individuals and their social interactions take place in systematic contexts which can be measured. Hence they permit explanation and prediction of behavior in a more exact way than in past traditions. Bales has offered a pioneering work that has the potential to move us into a new theoretical epoch no less than a new century. His work holds out the promise of synthesis and support for psychologists, sociologists, and all who work with groups and organizations of all kinds.","ISBN":"978-0-7658-0872-1","shortTitle":"Social Interaction Systems","language":"English","author":[{"family":"Bales","given":"Robert"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2001",3,30]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RND9ndx8TOoUV}(Bales, 2001).

Activity systems created as part of RQ1/2 will then be evolved to create a pedagogical framework and associated observations. 