
General comments

- lack of the introduction hard to get to grips with
- recaps on previous content useful - with examples too ideally
- there are a lot of specialist terms - so the nature of the audience and the process of using a glossary etc need to be thought about.
- some of the headings levels seem a bit off - some of the sections are very short - reexamine those


John's comment -
There's a current disconnect between the section on the vignette on drama and the other sections. There is a link with the magic circle of the drama process and that of a restricted tools set.

Mick - the link was in terms of exploring authenticity in the understanding of the drama process and that of the tools involved. However exploring authenticity in a theme to compete with agency added too much confusion to the structure.
Mick will return to this and explore applications and impact of concepts of magic circle, affective space, code playground, and suggested learner pathways with agency as a key lens.

We also discussed things that could be left to one side as not essential to explore the current research questions.
While used as a tool for analysis, the 3 lenses of Rogoff don't need to be used extensively. Also the levels of abstraction / activity may not need to be explored in detail.  
Also, I will try to fit discussion into the data chapters rather than as a separate chapter.

Much of the existing writing in methodology of the processing of data should be dropped and only those relevant to justifying later data should be included.
It may be a squeeze to fit in the theoretical framework and the research methods in one methodology chapter.
The interaction of AT and DBR should be well explored. Some of this can live in the "evolving design" chapter which outlines the process in detail highlighting tensions in the learning design. this will also include data from 4 pracitioner interviews.

Question from Mick how much discussion can you have in a conclusion?

Cathy, normal contents include;
- contribution to knowledge,
- the "so what", how does this impact practice / wider domains
- summarise some of the punchlines of the researcher
- limitations (not too much)
- next steps

Next steps for this process.

Cathy to share back comments on the current chapter.
I will then then address immediate issues especially justifications of claims.

I identified lots of areas to work on; mostly chapters like literature review, methodology, GDP chapter. However the next priority is the "evolving design" chapter. Work includes; to analyse practitioner data and link tensions emerging; analyse in relation to emerging tensions from the experimental phases of the process; discussion of the process within the concepts of AT and Design based research.  

Next meeting 21/7/23 - 11am 
