Threads of Digital Game Use in Education ========================================

Introduction ------------

This writing traces the foundations and various influences of current landscape of digital games and education. Inspired by the approach of the Platform Studies series of books on the impact of various video game platforms, I have found it useful to use lenses of culture, technology and economics in reviewing literature of this area Bogost and Montfort, 2009). While the following analysis has a primary focus on the cultural motivations for the use of games in education, the examples of specific groups using or making games for learning illustrate how technological and economic factors are intertwined with cultural drivers.

For brevity, I will use the term digital games based learning (DGBL) as an umbrella term. Eck divides DGBL approaches into three areas; students building games from scratch, bespoke educational (or serious) games designed by professionals and commercial-off-the-shelf games (COTS) integrated into classrooms Eck, 2006). I address game making in other sections.

COTS games in this context are commercial-off-the-shelf games designed for entertainment that educators integrate into learning experiences. De Freitas 2007) defines the distinction between COTS and serious games being that the primary purpose of a serious game is to support formal learning outcomes. Notes on study methods.

Mayer 2012) notes the complex use of terminology in the area of digital games and suggests a framing, rather than definition, of terms to allow for a non-exclusive methods of giving context to meaning dependant on the sub-communities that use them. Here I use framing of loosely associated schools of thought to bring to the foreground their preoccupations and associated tensions in their use of digital games. These schools are the study of digital games in a literacy context, games as commercial learning products and games as a focus for educational researchers and practitioners.

Game playing as a new form of literacy  ---------------------------------------

This school of approach is inspired by pioneering work by Gee and the New Literacies movement. Gee was inspired by the complex learning of language and other discourses that young people were engaging in by playing video games. Discourses in this New Literacy context can comprise a wide variety of communication forms to include "the burgeoning variety of text forms associated with information and multimedia technologies" The New London Group, 1996, p. 61). In the context of computer games this is particularly rich when game playing cultures have online elements which may including online play or internet forums which contain conversations, media created in game or around the game, help wikis, live chat possibilities and so on.

Gee also identified certain types of COTS games (including MMORGS -- Massively Multiplayer Online Roleplay Games) which are complex, require a significant investment in player time and are rich in learning potential. Stewart outlines research which shows the development of strategy, media creation and maths in "crafting practices" in MMORGS 2011, p. 111). Stewart terms this learning "Stealth Learning" and describes it an unintended learning which is hard to quantify or predict.

There is an attraction of large complex learning environments for naturalistic researchers allowing a focus is on the representation of the complexity of the learner experience and environment rather than on measurable learning outcomes. Issues of interest include; player participation in game ecologies, gender and game preferences and virtual economies in games Burke, 2018; Carr, 2005; Humphreys, 2011), For a more complete summary see Taylor, 2009).

Itō documents the value of the informal nature of digital explorations and identify play, and researches the resulting learning outcomes Itō, 2010). Diy media production and other meaning making in game playing communities are included in what been termed participatory culture Jenkins, 2009). An increasing number of studies explore such participation in computer games in a context of wider digital media literacy skills Buckingham et al., 2005).

Digital games as bespoke educational products ---------------------------------------------

To use games effectively in formal education where a prescribed content is required by a curriculum driven approach, skilful matching of game and outcome is essential Whitton, 2009). De Freitas 2007, p. 8) cautions against inappropriate use of games, advocating 'operating from learning outcomes and objectives and not just being used as a break in the learning'. This aligned approach can necessitate the creation of educational or serious games from scratch.

In the process of making serious games, Jenkins 2011, p. xxiv) describes a faultline between motivations of game designers, focused on the experience of play and those of educators concerned with *representing content*. He also notes the difficulty of translating the open ended aims of COTS games into prescribed serious games. The danger being that the *play is crushed out* of the games.

At their most simplistic level serious games are can be represented as sugar pills, tricking learners into ingesting educational content by stealth. In this vision, instructional game designers chase a *Holy Grail* of making dull learning including the process of data retention more exciting Prensky, 2005). Critics of this approach highlight the lower level pedagogical approach of the majority of DGBL products which favour information recall activities bolted on to entertainment games Eck, 2006; Squire, 2006). To contrast the approach of *exogenous* games where the learning context has nothing to do with the game, Squire recommends *endogenous* games where context is intrinsic to game play.

Researchers interested in the use of open-ended and unintentional learning in games are not necessarily hostile to the use of games for more formal learning outcomes. Many authours highlight the potential for serious games and simulations to surpass drill and practice approaches and to facilitate higher learning outcomes Eck, 2006; Gee, 2003; Whitton, 2009). Gee advocates the creation of educational games as long as game elements are well preserved, using war simulations as examples of good practice in creating effective instructional games Gee, 2005).

Simulations

Simulations are a particular subset of serious games that deserve a discrete description. Simulations as industry training activities predate the use of digital games and have origins in the areas of health care, military, national policy budgeting Djaouti et al., 2011; Michael and Chen, 2005; Sawyer and Smith, 2008). De Freitas notes particular characteristics of simuations 2011, p. 3). The goal is to represent reality as closely as possible and they are often less immersive that COTS games. As to the question are simulations games, the author observes that that while simulations and games they have different histories, roles and feedback mechanisms the genres are starting to converge.

**Serious Games Movement **

As with similations, topics addressed by serious games are very broad in scope. While a detailed description is beyond the scope of this writing (for a review see Connolly et al., 2012)), it is useful to explore the surrounding ecology of game makers, researchers and other serious game advocates commonly referred to as the Serious Game Movement. This movement is made up of involvement of charitable educational foundations, government funding organisations, ngos, game design companies and specialist researchers all involved in the production of and research into serious games. Prominent research groups and individuals are sometimes also active protagonists in the production process. Notable groups include the Serious Games Institute and Serious Games Initiative Wilkinson, 2016).

While Sawyer and Smith 2008) identify legitimate contextual factors that present opportunities for educators to appropriate existing gaming hardware and market mechanics, it is sensible to remain sceptical of claims from a research ecology which benefits from the ongoing production of educational software.

To give an example, there is a tendency to over evangelise the effectiveness of this approach. In a report by the Serious Games Initiative (SGI) , Tucker marvels that at the same time as the emergence of many "messy", complex global problems the solution (ie DGBL) comes "paradoxically in a package that could hardly have looked neater" 2012, p. 2). Tucker here champions games as interactive systems which mirror the systems of policy decision making. The SGI game Budget Hero, where players simulate the budget decisions made by a central government is an example of this approach. It is reasonable to assume that the goal of such reports is in part to leverage government funding allocated to educational programmes on key issues to create serious games.

One particular area of the Serious Games Movement which has particular issues with concerning measurement of effect is that of Games for Change. Game for Change activities started with an eponymous conference in 2004 which set out an objective to apply serious games objectives to areas of social change. Mc Gonigal is a prominent advocate for the potential for social change through digital games and gamification practices 2011). One of her key objectives is to create games which can create a "*measurable difference in the present state of reality"* McGonigal, 2007).

As a counterpart to the more general move towards performance indicators in education driven by market ideology Apple, 2001), we can see impact evaluation in funded social change projects as a discourse directed by funding organisations Gertler et al., 2016). The focus on measurement which is part of the serious games and games for change as a need for justification of funding allocation.

Mayer's study looking at the methodologies for measuring effectiveness and notes a huge diversity in approach Mayer, 2012). Pre- and post- tests are one of the most common forms of measuring individual learning from games but such approaches are limited and problematic Whitton, 2014). Measuring wider social change is more complex still and thus more problematic. In this light Mc Gonigal's aspirations seem to project far beyond current capabilities in the field.

It is legitimate to question the process of measurement of learner impact of such programmes. Specifically, does a focus on designing for measurable outcomes in the serious games movement create a tendency to select easy to measure outcomes and thus address lower order learning? After conversations with some in the games for change world, I suspect that in many cases it does. In any case, it is clear research in the area of impact needs further development and to be conducted by researchers with less potential bias. More needed on measurement and learning objectives.

Game playing as broader educational experience ----------------------------------------------

If we can see one of the primary drives of the Serious Games Movement as production of software products which produce measurable learning, we can contrast this with a school of educational researchers and practitioners who focus more on the social and cultural aspects of learner experience using games Freitas and Maharg, 2011). Here teachers can be seen as facilitators actively orchestrating a learning experience. The focus of attention widens to include the learning ecology around the game rather than the game as a self contained product.

Educational games face practical problems of the cost and development time of the computer games that they compete against Whitton and Hollins, 2008). This results in limitations of the end product in terms of productions values and negative perceptions of learners Jenkins, 2002). Several strategies have been advocated to address this issue.

De Freitas 2007)advocates the modification (modding) of existing COTS games as a practical way to facilitate the participation of education professionals in the design of high quality, immersive game experiences and thus allow better mapping of game play to specific learning outcomes . A popular engine which allows this is Neverwinter Nights. Francis outlines a promising study which mods Neverwinter Nights to explore historical events of the American Revolution from a "first person perspective'"2011, p. 87)

Whitton 2012) promotes the use of several strategies to address the cost barriers of using COTS games or commissioning bespoke educational software including the use of alternative reality games, designing learning experiences with existing virtual worlds and game building using free game engines.

This framing of the approach of educational researchers and practitioners can be contrasted from that of serious games evangelists in terms of a more moderated assessment of innovative practice surrounding games and the role of games as a motivational factor.

Prensky 2001) proposed the term Digital Game-Based Learning in a book of the same name. While this enthusiasm and advocacy was understandable as a reaction to hostility video games Squire, 2002), certain of key ideas advanced have been critiqued by later studies.

The idea that digital natives made up of younger gernations brought up with information technology require different types of learning input have yet to be supported by wider evidence Bennett et al., 2008; Helsper and Eynon, 2010).

The unqualified advocacy of the use of games as a motivational factor and vehicle for stealth learning is also challenged by researchers Whitton, 2008, 2007). The study in question posits that while many learners see a potential value in games as part of a learning process, this is true primarily when they see the games in question as being the most effective way of learning specific material or skills.

Another area of interest to educators is the learning activities that happens around digital games, especially those which to promote higher level learning such as reflection & analysis. This focus on innovative pre- and post- game environment and activities allows a more adaptive approach when it comes to educators integration of COTS games into classrooms to support formal learning objectives Eck, 2006). The shifting between real and virtual activities and the possibilities for multimodal and plural (as opposed to as set order) learner pathways and experiences offers new opportunities and challenges to learning designers de Freitas and Neumann, 2009).

\ 