Investigating the potential of collaborative intergenerational game making

Background

The increasing prevalence and complexity of digital technology and the subsequent lag in associated teaching strategies is addressed in a recent report on UK computer education []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"c2kbMLuk","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","plainCitation":"(The Royal Society, 2017)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4655,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/VC9G3QNW"],"itemData":{"id":4655,"type":"report","title":"After the Reboot: computing education in UK Schools","source":"ResearchGate","shortTitle":"After the Reboot","author":[{"literal":"The Royal Society"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2017"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDswe41X4Wp0}(The Royal Society, 2017). The report highlights the potential of digital game making to enhance computing provision and need for more research into this area. It also foregrounds Wing's conception of computational thinking, which prioritises abstract thought processes and pre-planning, as a key component of a computing curriculum []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"dET7a6dL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(2006)","plainCitation":"(2006)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":293,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/3ECCZCNZ"],"itemData":{"id":293,"type":"article-journal","title":"Computational thinking","container-title":"Communications of the ACM","page":"33","volume":"49","issue":"3","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1145/1118178.1118215","ISSN":"00010782","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Wing","given":"Jeannette M."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2006",3,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDsfL5qgdvQP}(2006).

Game making is also happening in informal settings including museums, libraries and after school clubs via initiatives like Code Club and Coder Dojo. Here, non-expert volunteers and younger participants form intergenerational learning communities to create games together using accessible technology. While these environments have great potential to inform practice in digital making, teaching of computing and intergenerational approaches, sparse research exists.

This lack of research is disappointing as pioneers of digital game making Papert and Turkle []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"7aJb2EU4","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(1990)","plainCitation":"(1990)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":3905,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/PN46846P"],"itemData":{"id":3905,"type":"article-journal","title":"Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of the Concrete","container-title":"Signs","volume":"16","issue":"1","URL":"http://www.papert.org/articles/EpistemologicalPluralism.html","author":[{"family":"Papert","given":"Seymour"},{"family":"Turkle","given":"Sherry"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1990"]]},"accessed":{"date-parts":[["2017",11,1]]}},"suppress-author":true}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDZ1KomrVAO4}(1990) explored the value of diverse learner pathways, social approaches and multiple media in learning environments in early studies. Subsequent studies have prioritised individual computing progress using particular software tools rather than playful possibilities of material and community activities to support learner autonomy and collaboration in digital making. This study will design a pedagogical framework as part of a participatory game making club for families which addresses these deficits.

Methodology

Constructivism will form the core theoretical foundation for this study. Based on constructivism's epistemological belief that knowledge is social and collaboratively constructed, this study will focus on the importance of learner experience. Thus I adopt an applied constructivist approach of student centred learning which highlights feedback, collaboration and learner autonomy []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"DklhkuUm","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)","plainCitation":"(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4359,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/BPTBUSXD"],"itemData":{"id":4359,"type":"article-journal","title":"Rich environments for active learning: a definition","container-title":"ALT-J","page":"5-34","volume":"3","issue":"2","source":"CrossRef","DOI":"10.1080/0968776950030202","ISSN":"0968-7769, 1741-1629","shortTitle":"Rich environments for active learning","language":"en","author":[{"family":"Grabinger","given":"R. Scott"},{"family":"Dunlap","given":"Joanna C."}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1995",1]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDGVKI5gmfDp}(Grabinger and Dunlap, 1995).

\ **Research Questions**

1.  What methods currently exist to facilitate collaborative learning in     digital game making environments and how effective do participants     and facilitators perceive them to be? 2.  How can an activity theory be used to develop a playful pedagogic     framework to facilitate agency and learning in a multi-generational     game making project? 3.  What are the effects of applying of a playful pedagogic framework on     learner autonomy, collaboration and computational thinking skills in     a game making project? 4.  What is an effective way to capture and analyse data to study     collaborative learning in a complex game making environment?

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ |                       |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ |                       | Interviews with game  |                       | |                       | making facilitators   |                       | |                       | (4)                   |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Pilot game-making     |                       |                       | | workshops (6) with    |                       |                       | | home education        |                       |                       | | families              |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Collaborative design  |                       |                       | | workshops (2)         |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | P2                    | Revision of           |                       | |                       | pedagogical design    |                       | | 5/19 -- 4/20          | based on P1 results   |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | Workshops to test     |                       |                       | | data collection       |                       |                       | | methods for P3 (2)    |                       |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | P3                    | Facilitation and      |                       | |                       | observation of two    |                       | | 5/20 -- 1/22          | iterations of game    |                       | |                       | making workshops      |                       | |                       | (12)\                 |                       | |                       | Collaborative design  |                       | |                       | workshops (2)         |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+ | 1/22 -- 9/23          | Writing up of results |                       | +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

**Research Context & Methods **

Research will happen in phases (timeline in separate document) . Phase activities are outlined in the table above. Data gathering will be undertaken at twice yearly game making courses which I facilitate for MMU's EdLab project. Courses comprise 6 workshops and with 12-15 participants comprising Home Educator parents and children aged 8-12.

P1 begins with interviews with four regional game making facilitators to inform an initial pedagogical framework. The resulting pilot design will be tested with the target group. Two subsequent participatory workshops will record participant feedback and suggested alterations to the design of the intervention.

P2 incorporates a revision of the design and three workshops to test emergent data gathering methods which may include screen capture, wide-angle video of work areas and participant audio logs. The goal is to support naturalistic data analysis without interrupting learning experience or generating unwieldy datasets and address RQ4.

P3 comprises the bulk of data gathering via two iterations of the evolving pedagogical framework using data collection methods emerging from P2. I will take the role of participant observer and focus on user perspective of the learning environment via journal entries and subsequent in-depth interviews with six families to explore areas of emerging interest.

It is expected that rich digital recordings generated by processes developed in P2 and diverse artefacts created by participants as part of the game making process will greatly enhance data on the user perspective.

Data Analysis

The participatory approach outlined above, informed by the philosophical underpinning of constructivism will require an analytical tool capable of interpretation of a rich and reciprocal learning environment over time. Thus activity theory will be used as a suitable lens to analyse the complexity of the emerging pedagogical design including power relations, helping behaviour, role of mediating objects, participant questioning and problem solving strategies []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"orLZNmkL","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Engestr\\uc0\\u246{}m, 1999)","plainCitation":"(Engeström, 1999)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4686,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/7SGJF2HH"],"itemData":{"id":4686,"type":"chapter","title":"Activity Theory and Individual and Social Transformation","container-title":"Perspectives on Activity Theory","publisher":"Cambridge University Press","page":"19–38","source":"PhilPapers","author":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"}],"editor":[{"family":"Engeström","given":"Yrjö"},{"family":"Miettinen","given":"Reijo"},{"family":"Punamäki-Gitai","given":"Raija-Leena"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["1999"]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDzpCXGaUW75}(Engeström, 1999).

In P1 a literature review will inform research design and creation of a thematic coding scheme (after Braun and Clarke) to analyse pilot workshop observations. I will use activity theory to analyse interviews of participants in game making communities to represent prototype activity systems of participants, practices and materials.

P2 and P3 are characterised by an on-going analysis of data further refining each iteration of the resultant pedagogical design. While data collection is expected to be extensive, key journal entries will illuminate focal areas. Interview data and digital artefacts of these key moments will be analysed with a particular focus on group dynamics via interaction process analysis []{#ZOTERO_ITEM CSL_CITATION {"citationID":"xHG3oDJ5","properties":{"formattedCitation":"(Bales, 2001)","plainCitation":"(Bales, 2001)","noteIndex":0},"citationItems":[{"id":4743,"uris":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/2C77KCDE"],"uri":["http://zotero.org/users/1913249/items/2C77KCDE"],"itemData":{"id":4743,"type":"book","title":"Social Interaction Systems: Theory and Measurement","publisher":"Transaction Publishers","publisher-place":"New Brunswick, NJ","number-of-pages":"417","edition":"1 edition","source":"Amazon","event-place":"New Brunswick, NJ","abstract":"Social Interaction Systems is the culmination of a half century of work in the field of social psychology by Robert Freed Bales, a pioneer at the Department of Social Relations at Harvard University. Led by Talcott Parsons, Gordon W. Allport, Henry A. Murray, and Clyde M. Kluckhohn, the Harvard Project was intended to establish an integrative framework for social psychology, one based on the interaction process, augmented by value content analysis. Bales sees this approach as a personal involvement that goes far beyond the classical experimental approach to the study of groups.Bales developed SYMLOG, which stands for systematic multiple level observation of groups. The SYMLOG Consulting Group approach was worldwide as well as interactive. It created a data bank that made possible a search for general laws of human interaction far beyond anything thus far known. In his daringsearch for universal features, Bales redefines the fundamental boundaries of the field, and in so doing establishes criteria for the behavior and values of leaders and followers. Bales offers a new \"field theory,\" an appreciation of the multiple contexts in which people live.Bales does not aim to eradicate differences, but to understand them. In this sense, the values inherent in any interaction situation permit the psychologist to appreciate the sources of polarization as they actually exist: between conservative and liberal, individualistic and authoritarian, libertarian and communitarian. Bales repeatedly emphasizes that the mental processes of individuals and their social interactions take place in systematic contexts which can be measured. Hence they permit explanation and prediction of behavior in a more exact way than in past traditions. Bales has offered a pioneering work that has the potential to move us into a new theoretical epoch no less than a new century. His work holds out the promise of synthesis and support for psychologists, sociologists, and all who work with groups and organizations of all kinds.","ISBN":"978-0-7658-0872-1","shortTitle":"Social Interaction Systems","language":"English","author":[{"family":"Bales","given":"Robert"}],"issued":{"date-parts":[["2001",3,30]]}}}],"schema":"https://github.com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json"} RNDQsEH2USzBd}(Bales, 2001).

P4 marks an end to this design and analysis feedback cycle with no new data being gathered, analysis concluding and thus a shift to writing up of results using activity theory as the primary interpretive framework.\ \ \ **References** 