As a counterpoint to the previous critiques of lack of effectiveexploration of values in making , Ratto's concept of Critical Making hasa focus of the potential of the process to do just that2011).He identifies critical thinking and exploration of civic concerns as apotential outcome of the process of the social making of objects. Hehighlights a gulf between technical work and social work that criticalmaking can bridge. More specifically, in the exploration of societalissues effected by technology. He finds use in a distinction between*caring about* an issue and a more informed *caring for* an issueinformed by experience and a sense of responsibility.

This stems from the reframing of our reality as designed rather thandiscovered. Thus shifting matters of fact (which can't be changed) intomatters of concern where the outcome is at playLatour,2008). In the exploration of two case studies the author recommendsacknowledging and exploring the reductive nature of process oftranslating complex social issues into physical and digital models as away of mitigating risks of over simplification discussionsRatto,2011, p. 8).

Ratto maps three, non-linear phases of Critical Making, exploration ofexisting areas (texts or ideas), making prototypes to reductively mapsuch ideas and finally reflection and exploration of ideas through therevision of prototypes. The author links the process to three keyelements of constructionism the possibility for emotional dimension oflearning, the importance of transitional objects

We can make a parallel between the conversations stages of criticalmaking to the forms of discourse needed computer mediated learningTeasley, using the computer as a way of disambiguating language withreference to something more concrete on the screen.