*This writing is a potential extract from my literature review, as such, some concepts that would have previously explored in literature around game playing and Digital Game-Based Learning will have already been explored. I will make reference to those in this extract when there is a cross over between the pedagogy of game playing and game making. *

Overview of Game Making Studies by Learning Outcomes  =====================================================

In this writing I will look at research categorised by their underlying educational motivations for making games in a learning context, namely; the deep learning of subject content, learning computer coding, systems and design approaches, to promote wider access to technology (particularly for girls), and finally game making to facilitate critical thinking, collaboration and communication.

By including any one study in these categories I do not wish to imply that it applies to this area exclusively. Kafai and Burke 2014) eschew the simplicity of a similar categorisation in a review by Hayes and Games 2008), noting large areas of crossover as many studies have more than one target outcome. While acknowledging this limit, I am using this approach for practical reasons to structure this writing and give a broad overview of the concerns of the field.

Games as a way to learn subject material across the curriculum --------------------------------------------------------------

There are significant studies in the use of game design activities to support learning of non-computing curriculum subjects in the areas of maths Giannakos et al., 2015; Kafai, 1994; Ke, 2014), english language skills Burke, 2012; Owston et al., 2009; Robertson and Good, 2005), nutrition Baytak and Land, 2010), science Kangas, 2010) and history Squire et al., 2005).

In a seminal study Kafai used the process of constructing games in the LOGO language to encourage students at teach and fractions and scientific concepts 1994). Through detailed analysis of student learning logs and pre-post tests Kafai found students were better able to communicate the concepts behind the mathematical concepts about which they had made educational games 1998). One notable findings and concern of this study was that often the content was integrated in games extrinsically rather than being integral to game play Kafai et al., 1998). Students got so wrapped up in the concrete challenge of making a game that deeping and researching the content is neglected. This tendency of these novice game designers should not be surprising as the same critique of focusing on game elements over content has often been levelled at professional educational games producers. (find source)

Squire and colleagues conducted a two year study looking at elements of social learning happening around the modification of the Civilisation game. The goals was to facilitate disadvantaged students to explore identities as producers as well a consumers of the historical simulation game 2011). The study drilled down into the specifics of the game modification process and found that participants demonstrated an increasingly complex understanding of the multiple factors at play in historical situations as an outcome of playing and most importantly re-designing the simulation Squire, 2005).

Squire and colleagues also describe the gradual process of moving from player to designer and resultant shifts in perspective Squire et al., 2005). This work is followed by later studies which focus on emergent learning communities which develop outside of a classroom context which share often complex detail on the process of modifying (modding) Civilisation Owens, 2011; Squire and Giovanetto, 2008). While these studies are of great interest, we can however question the time commitment needed to apply this to educational use within mainstream schools.

Moreno-Leon and Robles have undertaken a review of studies looking beyond the study of pure programming using the Scratch visual programming language Moreno-León and Robles, 2016). Here the authors, see promise in programmes that integrate programming activities into wider curriculum to support subject learning highlighting studies involving maths Lewis and Shah, 2012; Zavala et al., 2013), english language arts Burke, 2012; Moreno-León and Robles, 2015) and science Lai and Lai, 2012). However the authors caution that most studies on game making in this context area do not conform with aspirations for social science research as outlined by Cohen and colleagues 2011). Specifically the group sizes are relatively small, studies often lack control groups and there are few pre post tests.

The limits of other key studies used to support the case for the promise of game making to support subject knowledge, particularly those in Kafai and Burke's review 2015) should also be examined. While the game making study of Kafai 1994) is rich in data and participants, many others of those cited often have extremely limited user base. This is most notable in the case of a widely cited study by Baytak and Land which focused on only three participants 2010). Other studies are only partial in the extent of testing subject knowledge acquisition or deepening of knowledge. In particular, while Kafai and Burke, as advocates for game making, include studies to supply weight of argument of the use of games making to promote subject knowledge, many of the original authours are often cautious about this and often highlight other other skill acquisition as a more primary learning activity Baytak and Land, 2010; DiSalvo et al., 2014; Ke, 2014; Schanzer et al., 2013). It is also striking that a study by Oswton which did quantify subject based skills in English language arts had mixed results in this area while more promising results in the wider area of digital fluency Owston et al., 2009).

Games as a way to learn programming -----------------------------------

A rich tradition of using games to learn programming has its origins in the creation of the LOGO language and subsequent studies incorporating game making and digital art creation Papert, 1980). Papert's concept of using LOGO language to control Microworlds, digital realms with digital objects with physical characteristics, to make the process of learning object oriented approaches to computer coding more concrete still influences game making tool designs including the Game Maker and the Scratch tools Overmars, 2005; Resnick et al., 2009).

Observations on the acquisition of computing concepts through game making are found in a numerous studies Al-Bow et al., 2009; Boechler et al., 2014; Howland and Good, 2015; Reynolds and Caperton, 2011; Stolee and Fristoe, 2011). The have also been a great number of software tools and adaptations of existing tools specifically promote the learning to of programming concepts. Beyond the previously mentioned, Game Maker and Scratch, these include: Agent Sheets and Cubes A. Repenning, 2013; Repenning et al., 2015), Alice Kelleher et al., 2007), Stagecast Creator Smith et al., 2000), Toon Talk Adamson et al., 2002; Kahn et al., 2004), Kodu Touretzky et al., 2013), RPG Maker Weitze, 2016),

What follows is a deeper look at particular studies which have taken a systematic and in-depth look at game making used as a vehicle primarily to build skills in CT and programming.

Definitions of computational thinking or learning have become increasingly sophisticated but are starting to stabilise around certain key concepts Grover and Pea, 2013; Werner et al., 2014). These can be summarised as creating abstracted structures, systematic approaches, use of symbol systems, sequencing, problem decomposition (modularising), iterative and parallel thinking, conditional logic and debugging.

Grizioti and Kynigos 2018) note that while the pedagogical benefits of grounded, endocentric activity to facilitate the acquisition of CT skills have long been advanced, most activities designed to teach CT are still closed, abstracted exercises. They highlight the suitability of game making open and tangible activity. The promise of game making here in particular, as compared to other media making, is significant. A study of game making in Scratch showed more computational concepts used than other media making activities Adams and Webster, 2012).

The 'Use-Modify-Create' approach proposed by Lee and colleagues 2011) is promising to counter issues of user anxiety surrounding the difficulty of coding games. The approach emerged from studies looking to draws upon the findings of other exploratory game making studies Denner et al., 2014, 2012; Werner et al., 2014, 2013). The model advocates the remixing of existing games to act as a scaffold to build the competence of the beginner coder. Learners are guided to progress in the complexity of their modifications, thus becoming increasing proficient in the recognition and use of computational concepts and structures Lee et al., 2011).

The concept of 'half-baked' games, games which are incomplete or somehow deficient in a way which motivates learners to delve into the code and improve them, offers a possible enchancement to the 'Use-Modify-Create' model Kynigos, 2007; Kynigos and Yiannoutsou, 2018). The challenge of half-baked games is to design them in a way which encourages malleability of the code in directions that the learner may find useful to improve the game at hand. Thus, the original game designer makes complex decisions which highlight certain affordances of the game in an aim to encourage the exploration of key concepts (in this case computational thinking). Kynigos and Yiannoutsou have identified a progression in the type of CT skills used as the process of modifying the game evolves through the Use-Modify-Create stages. Users move from modes of pattern recognition associated with reading of code to ones of creation of abstracted structures and sequencing their own algorithms. Kynigos also highlights the possibilities of a half-baked artefact to build learner dialogue around the problems at hand as as 'a communicational tool to shape a common language within the community' 2007, p. 336). Elements of learning designs to support dialogue are explored in a later section of this writing.

The prescriptive and categorisable nature of CT would seem to suit rigorous assessment. Werner and Denner built ambitious assessment elements into a two year programme using Alice to make games. They developed a software tool to quantify levels of computational thinking. They chose a progressive model of; thinking algorithmically, using of design patterns and finally the combination of those patterns into large game mechanics Werner et al., 2014, 2012). This mirrors work done to automatically analyse Scratch project to assess levels of Computational Thinking Hoover et al., 2016). Here by contrast, analysis is undertaken using framework of use of chosen programming language syntax and data types rather than game mechanics and code pattern usage.

While ambitious and grounded in approach, it is hard to imagine it performing a meaningful analysis of the computational skills of users. The automated nature of the process around a structural complexity of patterns favours a particular approach which may not match that of all coders. Variations in coding styles touch on long standing tensions in conceptions of computational thinking and practice Papert and Turkle, 1990). Brennan and Resnick 2012) note the limitations of scraping, automated analysis of CT as it can evaluate only the product and not the practice or perspectives of users. They also note that the reuse of code common in the game remixing practice can skew assessment as designers may include working code that they do not truly understand.

Using examples from the Scratch tool, Brennan and Resnick 2012) propose a model which identifies CT concepts, practices and perspectives. While this is in essence similar to formal model of CT, the focus is more social, tangible and flexible suiting a 'soft', ground up approach to coding Papert and Turkle, 1990, p. 166). While the propensity for Scratch to allow users to jump in and start coding allows for a greater user accessibility, it has also been criticised as steering users to create to badly structured code, namely fragmentation and 'excessive decomposition' Meerbaum-Salant et al., 2011, p. 171).

Systems thinking and design thinking as gaming literacies ---------------------------------------------------------

Games are complex systems made up on interrelated variables Akcaoglu, 2014). Systems thinking is a key part of game design and the professional habits of game designers Salen, 2007). Broadly speaking we can define systems thinking as having the following key concerns; that a systems is made up of interdependent parts, that each variable has importance impact on the other parts and that the results of interventions in systems are complex and often counter intuitive Goldstone and Wilensky, 2008; Hmelo-Silver and Pfeffer, 2004). In the scope of game design this is most clearly manifested in aspects of interplay between game elements and mechanics Zimmerman, 2008).

We can see an overlap between systems thinking and computational thinking in the areas of pattern recognition and developing code modularity. Indeed Werner and colleagues work, as describe above, take the development of systemic game mechanics as a proxy for advanced CT 2014).

As a complement to the development of coding proficiency and systems thinking, key researchers have expressed the importance of design thinking as an important skill which can be engendered by the process of game making Games and Squire, 2008; Razzouk and Shute, 2012; Zimmerman, 2008). Zimmerman brings the process of learning to think like a designer, systems analysis and play together into a wider concept of gaming literacies 2008).

Design methodology and practice is a wide area spanning many disciplines but the foundational concepts many areas have in common can be described as an iterative process, focus on practical goals and projects and a studio approach which values the hands-on mastery of tools as part of a community of practice Hetland et al., 2013; Hokanson, 2013; Hokanson and Gibbons, 2014). Denham and Guyotte 2018) explicitly link game design with wider with arts practice and point to the value of reflection in an iterative, design-based approach.

We can see the preoccupation with design, iteration and reflective practices through-out game making studies and the methodologies of the game making tools that support them. The developer of Scratch, Resnick 2007) outlines an iterative spiral design process linked to his conception of a kindergarden learning process and this preoccupation is visible in the design for the tool and community Resnick and Silverman, 2005). Roberson and Nicholson innovate a similar, progressive design method to support their work around narrative game building Robertson and Nicholson, 2007). Recall also the Use-Modify-Create approach Lee et al., 2011) which Kynigos 2015). argues is key to an effective scaffolding enabling participants to effectively learn programming.

A particularly useful tool to study in relation to gaming literacies is Game Star Mechanic (GSM). GSM is an online software specifically designed to communicate and build systems thinking and design thinking through the process of making video games. Several studies on systems thinking draw on the development and implementation of GSM Games, 2009; Games and Squire, 2008; Gee et al., 2008; Shute and Torres, 2012; Torres, 2009). Two key lines of approach here are the product of the doctoral theses of Games and Torres who worked on GSM as part a game making programme called Quest to Learn. Quest to Learn is a specialist secondary school in New York whose curriculum has been designed to foster new digital literacies through the embrace of systems thinking. Quest to Learn has learning through game making and analysis as a key part of its curriculum Tekinbaş et al., 2010).

The focus of the research of Games 2009; 2008) is on discourse analysis of the processes by which novices learn to think like professional game makers, specifically the process of learning design thinking. For him the development of a profession language of game making is key and is explored through analysis of participants functional use of terms when describing how games work. Such terms include; core mechanics, rules, space, goals, componentsGee et al., 2008).

Torres 2009) focuses more explicitly on the development of systems thinking using analysis of the game making activities embedded in the GSM. His research identifies four key concepts of systems thinking including; the concepts that many interrelated elements make up a﻿ game system, the importance of different kinds of positive and negative feedback loops, analysis of the quality of links between within a system element and the concept that similar dynamics can exist in unrelated systems. This work is supported by a preliminary and a later more in-depth evaluation of the Quest to Learn programme Shute et al., 2012; Shute and Torres, 2012). The findings of these evaluations showed improvement in the assessed areas of teamwork, time management, and systems thinking. While that of the first two was not as signficant and the latter, the fact that these skills were a focus of a secondary school assessment at all is in itself a signficant result.

In their assessment of systems thinking in middle school students making games using the Alice tool, Werner and colleagues Werner et al., 2014) see students progress beyond listing structural elements of systems to include understanding of their behavioural and functional interactions. Following Hmelo-Silver and Pfeffer 2004) they contend that more advanced students use mental models as an aid to create complex, dynamic responses to ill-formed problems and thus propose a problem-based learning approach.

This link between a deeper understanding of systems thinking and the value of a project based approach brings us back to the issue of tensions between the value of adopting a professional approach to learning and the difficulties of implementing such an approach in mainstream education. The process of thinking like a game designer encompasses a complexity of interrelated activities. Participation in these activities makes up a community ecosystem, be it in a workplace or learning programme, which can be described as a community of practice Wenger, 1998). The work of Lave and Wenger 1991) around legitimate peripheral participation and situated practice as a way of increasing access to a community can be seen as a key component to successful game making interventions designs Tekinbaş et al., 2014). This is is explored later in this writing.

Gender and the Digital Divide -----------------------------

This section encompasses studies addressing gender and other issues of accessibility. The process of reviewing studies based on accessibility is complicated by issues of reporting. In their review of game making studies Kafai and Burke 2015) note only half studies include data on gender and race of participants. As such, rather than attempting large scale analysis, I will draw out key issues from notable studies in game making and related studies on the process of attracting under-represented populations to STEM and CS programmes.

One factor common to many studies in this area is the importance of engendering student engagement and sustaining motivation. A common theme in writing about game making and game based learning in general is that of computer games as a medium of attention amongst young people and that therefore promote greater engagement in learning. However studies which convincingly support this broad statement are rare or mostly anecdotal Alexander Repenning, 2013; Repenning et al., 2015). This is often due to lack of scale and control groups in exploratory studies.

There is more convincing data from game making studies on the process of attracting under-represented populations into computer science programmes. A programme making games linked with campaigns using Scratch evidenced increased interest in computer science at college level among black and hispanic participants Ryoo et al., 2013).

To address the issue of girl's low self-confidence in the area of computing compared to their ability Beyer et al., 2003; Margolis and Fisher, 2002), extensive research by Roberson on game making in schools measured gender differences in performance and attitudes to game making and computing in pre post tests Robertson, 2013, 2012). The findings were mixed as while girls outperformed boys in use of computational structures, neither gender ended the programme with a greater desire to learn more about computers in the future.

The Girls Creating Games programme which asked similar questions concerning the impact of a Flash-based game programme on computer proficiency and desire to continue with computer studies Denner, 2007). Findings were again mixed but encouraging in some areas. While there was no increase in desire to persue computing, there were marked increases in computer related confidence, ability and a decrease in gender stereo typing around computer use.

The issues of gender stereo-typing and identity in relation to computers were explored by Pelletier as part of the Making Games project using the Mission Maker software 2008). Data was recorded from two UK schools in an 18 month after school programme. Pelletier draws on the work of Butler 1988) to caution against overdue influence of a set conception of gender or cultural stereotypes, seeing gender as a personal and flexible product of continuing activities and interactions. In this study, she explored the promise of the process of game design and the analysis of gaming habits as a platform and set of tools for young participants to explore and construct their gender identity over time. This area is a rich seam to explore and a more recent study by Fisher and Jenson critically explored diverse themes through a summer game making programme 2017). Emerging issues included pinkification, marginalisation and exclusions of women from game cultures, sexualisation and harassment.

Kafai and Burke also address the issues of gender identities and game design 2014). They propose that we ask not *How can we bring girls into the game making clubhouse* but rather *How can we build new clubhouses suitable for the interests of girls*. Two of the playful elements they suggest are textiles related technology and the promotion of more collaborative online spaces as opposed to technology competitions.

Concerning the financial aspect of digital divide, access to computers and other resources like game making software can be prohibitively expensive. Replicability due to cost issues may well be a factor of signficance in relation to some game making programmes. For example, Quest to Learn incorporates PS4 game consoles and commercial software like Little Big Planet in their Sports for the Mind programme both of which are relatively expensive Khan, 2014). Whitton 2012) looks as ways to avoid high cost solutions in the use of games in education and notes the use of free game making tools and other non-digital solutions.

Reynolds and Chiu 2016) assess the effectiveness of the Globaloria game making programme to reduce digital divide effects through a study involving 38 middles schools in the US. Results showed a closing of gaps in attainment for race and gender factors after taking part in the programme. Noting Hargittai's 2010) observations of lower computer skills of Black and Hispanics, women and those from lower socio-economic groups, the authors see this as notable evidence of the programmes success in this area.

While there have been some promising studies addressing race, gender and other issues of accessibility the area is still a rich one for exploration as researchers awareness and understanding of issues of intersectionality and their impact of the acceptance of game making programmes increases Kafai et al., 2017; Kafai and Burke, 2014).

Collaboration, creativity, reflection, communication as 21^st^ Century Skills -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Definitions of 21^st^ Century Skills vary widely Binkley et al., 2009). In an analysis of wider frameworks Voogt and Roblin, 2012), twenty first century skills have been summarised as collaboration, communication, ICT literacy, social/cultural skills & citizenship, creativity, critical thinking, problem solving and productivity/development of quality products. As such, many definitions include areas of design and systems thinking that we have already covered in this review of game making studies. Such overlaps is inevitable in this grounded approach to giving an overview of the concerns of the literature. This final section will concentrate on studies which include findings on issues of collaboration, communication and critical thinking.

This section to be completed soon..................\...

\ 