---
zotero:
  scannable-cite: false # only relevant when your compiling to scannable-cite .odt
  client: zotero # defaults to zotero
  author-in-text: false # when true, enabled fake author-name-only cites by replacing it with the text of the last names of the authors
  csl-style: harvard-manchester-metropolitan-university # pre-fill the style
layout: post
categories: draft
title: Blog Post -  Reflecting on Facilitating Student Voice in Creative Critical Assessment
---

TITLE: Reflecting on Facilitating Student Voice in Creative Critical Assessment



AUTHORS: Juliette Wilson-Thomas, Mick Chesterman and Caroline Jones



This article is based on the reflections of teaching staff engaged in delivering and assessing a module on project-based learning to foundation students in education. In this article we are specifically focusing on the impact and opportunity presented by literally engaging students' voices in the assessments. The module is designed using the principles of critical pedagogy (hooks, 1994; Freire, 1972) whereby, the aim is to respect the knowledge that students bring into the classroom, and for the assessment to enable students to meet their own development needs as defined by themselves.  



In assessing the module students are asked to develop a ‘creative piece’ which communicates what they understand about project-based learning from their experiences, and how they have developed their skills/understanding of themselves. Some guidance is given to support students in video creation, which many choose as their method of assessment, but it is purposefully left open, and students may choose any creative way of communicating their reflections. Creative critical assessment is defined by Kent (2020) as:



‘non-essay forms of coursework, specifically those with a creative, arts-based format, represented by an artistic output or object.’




### Reflections on authenticity of activities

While it is logical that authentic assessment benefits from being based on authentic activities, the process of planning and facilitating projects that motivate both the interests of learners and which are deemed suitable and practical by tutors can create notable tensions. Examples of these tensions are now explored within one of project challenges, that of creating a campaign stall based on their choice of issue to be delivered to staff and students in our building's foyer.  

<!-- Exploring a tension between the pet projects of tutors and the interests of learners.   -->

The open remit to choose an issue allowed students to draw on their funds of identity [@esteban-guitart_funds_2014] within a guided framework. The iterative process began with a rapidly created poster shared with the class, and progressed to a templated campaign based around the framework based on theory of change approach [@breuer_using_2015] specifically: problem, issue, audience, message, action and change. In the final stages regular feedback from both tutors and peers on the clarity of messages and use of resources shaped the final project.

The use of intermediate-level concepts (located between broader educational theories and concrete techniques) within this framework mirrors work in the field of human computer interaction research [@hook_strong_2012; @chesterman_game_2023]. While potentially detracting from student agency in the design process the heavy scaffolding is justified by a greater focus on the importance of group work process and reflection rather than the end product.

Overall, rather than detracting from the creativity of students the possibilities for expressing funds of interests and scaffolded group interactions within an   accelerated process has been received well by students and seen as positive by fellow staff members as illustrated in the following section.

<!-- This prompt reflection on different dimensions of authenticity in PBL in HE based on the leading activities (in this case a stall mixing presentation, resource creation), and the overall motivation of the tutors setting the tasks (in this case building repertoires of interaction with team members, staff and communicating to students outside of their cohort)

Limitations / Drawbacks include a limited extent that students can draw on their interests due to time and resource limitations and the restrictions of group work.  

Conclusion:

   -->


<!-- The process of drawing on funds on knowledge and student interest involves time to explore those communities that students are a part or. An alternative strategy is to use techniques to allow students to express funds of identities. -->


Reflections of the Marking Tutor



As a marking tutor for the assessments of student portfolios, what I found to be particularly significant during the marking process was delight in hearing the students’ voices via their reflections of the projects they had planned, managed, and delivered as part of this module demonstrating agency (Stenalt and Lassesen, 2021). Many of these projects were deeply rooted in social justice campaigns, real world community events and microteach tasks where students chose their own topics.  Many were aligned to student’s future aspirations and these opportunities enabled scope to build their projects based on their interests (Jones and Bell, 2025).   



The pedagogical methods adopted brought both the students and I moments of great joy during the reflection and subsequent marking processes (Whitsed, Giarardi and Williams 2024). I often found myself shouting out loud ‘YES’ at key points because I found the students making deep and meaningful connections to their own learning gains via the reflective process. For example, students talked about feelings of fear when having to talk to passing strangers about their campaign stalls but reflected on feelings of great joy and accomplishment once they had overcome these initial fears. These opportunities provide evidence of transformational learning theories in practice as students recognised their own learning gains from feeling uncomfortable initially, subsequent assimilation followed by deep reflection resulting in confidence growth.  These teaching and learning assessment opportunities helped students to build knowledge through practising, stepping out of their comfort zones, making mistakes, reflecting on those mistakes, managing themselves, managing others when working in teams and so much more beyond the assessment learning outcomes but most importantly in a safe space. It was good to hear the students recognise that it is acceptable to make mistakes and to use this experience to plan forwards.



In conclusion our reflections highlight the benefits of facilitating student voice in creative critical assessment practices with clear advantages for the students and the teaching staff. Embedding student voice and agency aids authentic assessment processes and diminishes the temptation to reproduce essays using essay mills or AI with significant learning gains for the students.   
